EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark (Auqaf and Settlement), Board of Revenue DARHOON vs AULADI AND ANOTHER Case No,. SROA-162 of 1981 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: (Auqaf and Settlement), Board of Revenue DARHOON Respondant: AULADI AND ANOTHER Result: Petition rejected. Judgment Date: 1983-01-29 Court: Board of Revenue Judges: Ali Muhammad G. Shaikh Citations Advocates Statutes P L D 1983 Rev. 25 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' This is an appeal filed against the order of Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad Division dated 18-10-1981, whereby he cancelled five years lease of the petitioner and ordered that it should remain for assaish of the village Urs Machi. ' The petitioner and the respondent are present alongwith their Advocates. ' Brief facts of the case are given in the impugned order of the Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad Division and need not be reproduced. The main contentions of the Advocate for the petitioner are that entire area of 10-10 acres does not fall within 20 chains of the village Urs Machi. He further contended that according to the conditions land down in the policy that the land which falls within 20 chains of village is to be reserved for village assaish and the area out side the 20 chains is to be disposed of. Therefore the order of Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad reserving the entire land of the petitioner for assaish in against policy. He has not be able to substantiate his contention through any documentary proof. ' The Advocate for respondent argued that entire grant of the petitioner is within 20 chains of the village Urs Machi, and the Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad has rightly reserved the entire area of the petitioner for assaish of village. ' I have heard the counsel of both the parties and considered their arguments carefully. Perused the relevant record and the report of the Assistant Commissioner, Shandadpur, which was summoned in this case. From the perusal of the report of the Assistant Commissioner, Shandadpur is appears that entire S. No,. 289/2, 3 and 4 area 10-10 acres falls within 20 chains of the village Urs Machi and no other land is available which could be granted to the petitioner. ' In view of the above facts 1 find no reason to interfere with the order of Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad. ' The revision petition is accordingly rejected. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue Judge(s): Ali Muhammad G. Shaikh Title: (Auqaf and Settlement), Board of Revenue DARHOON vs AULADI AND ANOTHER Case No.: Case No,. SROA-162 of 1981 Date of Judgment: 1983-01-29 Reported As: P L D 1983 Rev. 25 Result: Petition rejected. Judgment ORDER ' This is an appeal filed against the order of Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad Division dated 18-10-1981, whereby he cancelled five years lease of the petitioner and ordered that it should remain for assaish of the village Urs Machi. ' The petitioner and the respondent are present alongwith their Advocates. ' Brief facts of the case are given in the impugned order of the Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad Division and need not be reproduced. The main contentions of the Advocate for the petitioner are that entire area of 10-10 acres does not fall within 20 chains of the village Urs Machi. He further contended that according to the conditions land down in the policy that the land which falls within 20 chains of village is to be reserved for village assaish and the area out side the 20 chains is to be disposed of. Therefore the order of Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad reserving the entire land of the petitioner for assaish in against policy. He has not be able to substantiate his contention through any documentary proof. ' The Advocate for respondent argued that entire grant of the petitioner is within 20 chains of the village Urs Machi, and the Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad has rightly reserved the entire area of the petitioner for assaish of village. ' I have heard the counsel of both the parties and considered their arguments carefully. Perused the relevant record and the report of the Assistant Commissioner, Shandadpur, which was summoned in this case. From the perusal of the report of the Assistant Commissioner, Shandadpur is appears that entire S. No,. 289/2, 3 and 4 area 10-10 acres falls within 20 chains of the village Urs Machi and no other land is available which could be granted to the petitioner. ' In view of the above facts 1 find no reason to interfere with the order of Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad. ' The revision petition is accordingly rejected. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem