EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark (Mst.) HAMIDAN BEGUM vs ABDUL RIAZ And Other Writ Petition No. 607 of 1992 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 1 Coram 1 Appeallant: (Mst.) HAMIDAN BEGUM Respondant: ABDUL RIAZ And Other Result: N/A Judgment Date: 1993-10-28 Court: Lahore High Court Judges: Fazal Karim Author Citations Advocates Statutes K.L.R. 1995 Civil Cases 102 Judgment JUDGMENT FAZAL KARIM, J.- The petitioner, Mst. Hamida Begum, seeks by this petition under Article 199 of the Constitution a declaration that the judgment and decree of the learned Family Judge, Jhelum, dated 30.1.1992 and those of the learned Additional District Judge, Jhelum, 19.5.1992 in so far as they ordered the petitioner to return 6 kanals of land which she had received from the defendant's father at the time of her marriage while granting her decree of dissolution of marriage on ground of khula is without lawful authority and is of no legal effect. 2. The petitioner and the respondent, Abdul Riaz, were married on 7.11.1983. The marriage ran into difficulties and the petitioner instituted a suit for dissolution of marriage on 11.10.1990 on various grounds including the grounds that the defendant had failed to provide maintenance for a period of two years; had failed to perform his marital obligations for a period of three years, had been treating her with cruelty and khula. The suit was contested and on the parties' pleadings 8 issues were formulated and tried. Issue No. 3 was "whether the defendant has failed to provide maintenance for more than 2 years" issue No.4 was whether the plaintiff had failed to perform his marital obligations for a period of years; issue No.5 was whether the defendant habitually mal-treated the plaintiff and issue No.7 was "whether the plaintiff is entitled to decree for dissolution of marriage on ground of khula, if so, on what terms". The learned Family Judge found that the defendant had failed to maintain the plaintiff for more; than two years; that he had failed to perform his marital obligations for more than three years and that the behavior of the defendant was cruel" and decided issues No. 3,4 and 5 in the plaintiffs favour. He held also that the plaintiff and the defendant could not live "within the limits of God" and that "it is better to dissolve the marriage" .The learned Family Judge found also that on 5.11.1983, the defendant's father had by means of hibanama (Ex. D.1) transferred 6 kanals of land to the plaintiff "as consideration for marriage". He, therefore, decided issue No.7 also in favour of the plaintiff; in so doing, he said: "so the marriage is dissolved conditionally. The plaintiff has to return back 6 kanals of land to defendant's father or defendant. 3. It should be mentioned here that the defendant had instituted a suit for restitution of conjugal rights and both the suits were decided by the same judgment of the learned Family Judge dated 30.1.1992. 4. As a result of the findings, noticed above, the learned Family Judge held: "As my findings on above mentioned issues first suit for dissolution of marriage is decreed in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant on the basis of khula. The plaintiff is ordered to return back 6 kanals of land which she received from father of the defendant vide Hibanama Ex. D.1. Second suit for restitution of conjugal rights is hereby dismissed". 5. The petitioner appealed against the judgment and decree of the learned Family Judge but her appeal was dismissed by the judgment of the learned Addl. District Judge dated 19.5.1992. He affirmed the finding of fact returned by the learned Family Judge, namely, that the land had been given to her by the defendant's father in lieu of marriage and held that as she had asked for "dissolution of marriage on the basis of khula she has to fulfil the condition of khula laid down by the Family Court". 6. It has been settled by authority that a decree of dissolution of marriage on the basis of khula even though made conditional on return of benefits operates to dissolve the marriage when it is passed that its effect is not postponed till the benefits are returned and that non-payment of stipulated consideration for khula does not invalidate the dissolution of marriage by khula but only creates civil liability with regard to the benefits to be returned by the wife to the husband and does not affect the dissolution itself. (See Dr Akhlaq Ahmad Vs. Mst. Kishwar Sultana and others ( PLD 1983 S.C.169 ) In Sarnia Akber Vs. Muhammad Zubair (NLR 1990 Civil 155), it was held that the benefits ordered to be returned by the decree of the learned Family Court can be recovered in execution of the decree. 7. The only question requiring determination, therefore, is whether in the facts of the case, the learned Family Judge was right in law in ordering the return of 6 kanals of land, learned counsel for the petitioner maintained that as the petitioner had been held entitled to dissolution of her marriage on grounds of non-maintenance, non-performance of marital obligations and cruelty, it was wholly unnecessary to dissolve the marriage on ground of khula. It was pointed out that as there was no need to have resort to the ground of khula, the order of the learned Family judge directing the return of the land to the defendant was without lawful authority. Learned counsel for the defendant, respondent herein, argued that as the marriage had been dissolved on ground of khula, it was necessary for the learned Family Judge to determine the benefits which the plaintiff had derived from the defendant or his father and to order their return. 7. There can be no doubt that if this were a decree for dissolution of marriage on ground of khula alone, then the order of the learned Family Judge directing the return of the land to the defendant would have been unexceptionable. As has been seen, the learned Family Judge had found the petitioner entitled to have her marriage dissolved on grounds of non-maintenance, non-performance of marital obligations and cruelty. There is no question that the learned Family Judge was competent to dissolve the marriage on those grounds and also that the dissolution of marriage on those grounds and also that the dissolution of marriage on those grounds did not entail the return of the land. The ground of khula was no doubt one of the grounds taken in the plaint. But the plaintiff was entitled to take that ground in addition to other grounds. And as the findings of the learned Family Judge on issues No.3,4 and 5 entitled her to the decree for dissolution of marriage, it was wholly unnecessary for the marriage to be dissolved on the ground of khula. If I may say so, both the learned Family- judge and the learned Addl. District Judge ignored altogether, in passing the decree, the findings on issues No. 3,4 and 5 and decreed the suit on the ground of khula alone. This is a patent illegality, for if the findings on issues Nos. 3,4 and S had not been ignored, then there would have been no occasion for passing the decree on ground of khula only and ordering the return of 6 kanals of land. 8. For these reasons, the petition is accepted and the orders of the learned Family Judge and the learned Addl. District Judge ordering there turn of 6 kanals of land by the plaintiff to the defendant, Abdul Riaz respondent herein, one declared to have been made without lawful authority and to be of no legal effect. The parties are left to bear their own costs. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Lahore High Court Judge(s): Fazal Karim Title: (Mst.) HAMIDAN BEGUM vs ABDUL RIAZ And Other Case No.: Writ Petition No. 607 of 1992 Date of Judgment: 1993-10-28 Reported As: K.L.R. 1995 Civil Cases 102 Result: N/A Judgment JUDGMENT FAZAL KARIM, J.- The petitioner, Mst. Hamida Begum, seeks by this petition under Article 199 of the Constitution a declaration that the judgment and decree of the learned Family Judge, Jhelum, dated 30.1.1992 and those of the learned Additional District Judge, Jhelum, 19.5.1992 in so far as they ordered the petitioner to return 6 kanals of land which she had received from the defendant's father at the time of her marriage while granting her decree of dissolution of marriage on ground of khula is without lawful authority and is of no legal effect. 2. The petitioner and the respondent, Abdul Riaz, were married on 7.11.1983. The marriage ran into difficulties and the petitioner instituted a suit for dissolution of marriage on 11.10.1990 on various grounds including the grounds that the defendant had failed to provide maintenance for a period of two years; had failed to perform his marital obligations for a period of three years, had been treating her with cruelty and khula. The suit was contested and on the parties' pleadings 8 issues were formulated and tried. Issue No. 3 was "whether the defendant has failed to provide maintenance for more than 2 years" issue No.4 was whether the plaintiff had failed to perform his marital obligations for a period of years; issue No.5 was whether the defendant habitually mal-treated the plaintiff and issue No.7 was "whether the plaintiff is entitled to decree for dissolution of marriage on ground of khula, if so, on what terms". The learned Family Judge found that the defendant had failed to maintain the plaintiff for more; than two years; that he had failed to perform his marital obligations for more than three years and that the behavior of the defendant was cruel" and decided issues No. 3,4 and 5 in the plaintiffs favour. He held also that the plaintiff and the defendant could not live "within the limits of God" and that "it is better to dissolve the marriage" .The learned Family Judge found also that on 5.11.1983, the defendant's father had by means of hibanama (Ex. D.1) transferred 6 kanals of land to the plaintiff "as consideration for marriage". He, therefore, decided issue No.7 also in favour of the plaintiff; in so doing, he said: "so the marriage is dissolved conditionally. The plaintiff has to return back 6 kanals of land to defendant's father or defendant. 3. It should be mentioned here that the defendant had instituted a suit for restitution of conjugal rights and both the suits were decided by the same judgment of the learned Family Judge dated 30.1.1992. 4. As a result of the findings, noticed above, the learned Family Judge held: "As my findings on above mentioned issues first suit for dissolution of marriage is decreed in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant on the basis of khula. The plaintiff is ordered to return back 6 kanals of land which she received from father of the defendant vide Hibanama Ex. D.1. Second suit for restitution of conjugal rights is hereby dismissed". 5. The petitioner appealed against the judgment and decree of the learned Family Judge but her appeal was dismissed by the judgment of the learned Addl. District Judge dated 19.5.1992. He affirmed the finding of fact returned by the learned Family Judge, namely, that the land had been given to her by the defendant's father in lieu of marriage and held that as she had asked for "dissolution of marriage on the basis of khula she has to fulfil the condition of khula laid down by the Family Court". 6. It has been settled by authority that a decree of dissolution of marriage on the basis of khula even though made conditional on return of benefits operates to dissolve the marriage when it is passed that its effect is not postponed till the benefits are returned and that non-payment of stipulated consideration for khula does not invalidate the dissolution of marriage by khula but only creates civil liability with regard to the benefits to be returned by the wife to the husband and does not affect the dissolution itself. (See Dr Akhlaq Ahmad Vs. Mst. Kishwar Sultana and others ( PLD 1983 S.C.169 ) In Sarnia Akber Vs. Muhammad Zubair (NLR 1990 Civil 155), it was held that the benefits ordered to be returned by the decree of the learned Family Court can be recovered in execution of the decree. 7. The only question requiring determination, therefore, is whether in the facts of the case, the learned Family Judge was right in law in ordering the return of 6 kanals of land, learned counsel for the petitioner maintained that as the petitioner had been held entitled to dissolution of her marriage on grounds of non-maintenance, non-performance of marital obligations and cruelty, it was wholly unnecessary to dissolve the marriage on ground of khula. It was pointed out that as there was no need to have resort to the ground of khula, the order of the learned Family judge directing the return of the land to the defendant was without lawful authority. Learned counsel for the defendant, respondent herein, argued that as the marriage had been dissolved on ground of khula, it was necessary for the learned Family Judge to determine the benefits which the plaintiff had derived from the defendant or his father and to order their return. 7. There can be no doubt that if this were a decree for dissolution of marriage on ground of khula alone, then the order of the learned Family Judge directing the return of the land to the defendant would have been unexceptionable. As has been seen, the learned Family Judge had found the petitioner entitled to have her marriage dissolved on grounds of non-maintenance, non-performance of marital obligations and cruelty. There is no question that the learned Family Judge was competent to dissolve the marriage on those grounds and also that the dissolution of marriage on those grounds and also that the dissolution of marriage on those grounds did not entail the return of the land. The ground of khula was no doubt one of the grounds taken in the plaint. But the plaintiff was entitled to take that ground in addition to other grounds. And as the findings of the learned Family Judge on issues No.3,4 and 5 entitled her to the decree for dissolution of marriage, it was wholly unnecessary for the marriage to be dissolved on the ground of khula. If I may say so, both the learned Family- judge and the learned Addl. District Judge ignored altogether, in passing the decree, the findings on issues No. 3,4 and 5 and decreed the suit on the ground of khula alone. This is a patent illegality, for if the findings on issues Nos. 3,4 and S had not been ignored, then there would have been no occasion for passing the decree on ground of khula only and ordering the return of 6 kanals of land. 8. For these reasons, the petition is accepted and the orders of the learned Family Judge and the learned Addl. District Judge ordering there turn of 6 kanals of land by the plaintiff to the defendant, Abdul Riaz respondent herein, one declared to have been made without lawful authority and to be of no legal effect. The parties are left to bear their own costs. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-14 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem