EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark ABDUL NABI and others vs GOVERNMENT OF BALOCHISTAN through Secretary Education, Quetta and others Service Appeals Nos.105, 183, 184, 186, 107 to 122, 124 to 128, 132 to 135 of 2004 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 3 Appeallant: ABDUL NABI and others Respondant: GOVERNMENT OF BALOCHISTAN through Secretary Education, Quetta and others Result: Case remanded Judgment Date: 2009-10-30 Court: Balochistan Service Tribunal Judges: Muhammad Hashim Khan Kakar Muhammad Anwar Khan Muhammad Ibrahim Baloch Citations Advocates Statutes 2010 P L C (C.S.) 1136 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT ' MUHAMMAD HASHIM KHAN KAKAR (CHAIRMAN).--- This judgment shall dispose of S.As. Nos.105 to 128 of 2004 132 to 135 of 2005 and 183, 184 of 2005 as in all these matters common question of law and fact is involved. 2. These appeals have been preferred by the appellants against the impugned order dated 17-3-2003 passed by the respondents whereby the services of the appellants have been terminated who at the relevant time were performing their duties as Teachers in different schools. As per appellants their services were terminated through impugned order without any notice or giving them opportunity of hearing. It is stated they being dissatisfied preferred departmental appeals but the same were not disposed of and lastly fineing no other way out, the appellants approached this Tribunal. 2-A. The respondents contested the appeals by filing written statements challenging the maintainability of appeals on the ground of limitation. It is stated that no departmental appeals were preferred as required under section 9 of Balochistan Province Removal from Service (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000. On merits it is stated that an inquiry was conducted by the committee comprising Haji Abdul Manan Deputy Director of Education (Schools) Balochistan Quetta and Haji Abdul Ghaffar Khudazai, ADEO Loralai. Who after inquiry found the appointment order, service books of the appellant fake one. 3. We have heard learned counsel for the appellants, Advocate-General for the respondents and have gone through the record minutely. 4. Admittedly the above mentioned appeals are time barred but before dilating upon the question of limitation, it would be appropriate to reproduce the contents of impugned order dated 17-3-2003:--- "Consequent upon the complaints received in the Directorate of Education (S) Balochistan, Quetta that some persons have got bogus/fake appointment orders, the Director of Education (Schools) Balochistan, Quetta vide order No,19881-19950/EB dated the 23rd November, 2002 has appointed an Inquiry Committee to conduct informal inquiry for scrutinizing such Appointment Orders, Service Books and other relevant documents throughout the Province. According to the report of the inquiry committee, the documents of the following officials were found fake/bogus therefore, the Secretary Government of Balochisan, Education Department Quetta being competent authority ordered to terminate the services of the following with immediate effect under Balochistan Province Removal from Service (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000. He further ordered Director of Education (Schools) Balochistan/Executive District Officer Education and Drawing and Disbursing Officers concerned to lodge F.I.R. Against these bogus employees for making fraud with the Government and given loss to the Government exchequer." 5. It appears from bare reading of the contents of impugned order that on certain allegations amounting to misconduct, fraud, cheating the appellants have been dismissed from service while imposing major penalty. It clearly amounted to a stigma on appellants character and in all fairness they ought to have been given an opportunity of explaining their positions before passing impugned order. The principle of Natural Justice. "audi alteram partem" ' (No one should be condemned un-heard) is deemed to be a part of every statute unless its application is specifically excluded. 6. The impugned order shows and suggests to believe that about 119 teachers have been removed from service on the ground of finding their appointment orders, service books fake and bogus. Before passing the impugned order no opportunity was provided to the appellants in order to defend themselves. The impugned order is the out come of unilateral proceeding informal inquiry and the same is violative of the principle of Natural Justice and is liable to be declared without lawful authority and of no legal effect. 7. We are conscious of the fact that the appellants have been removed from service by the authority under the provisions of Balochistan Province Removal from Service (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000 and the competent authority under section 5, subsection (4) may dispense with the inquiry under subsection (1) subject to recording of reasons in writing for not doing so. 8. It is evident from record that certain allegations of serious nature amounting misconduct, fraud, cheating and misrepresentation have been levelled against the appellants, as such, in such peculiar circumstances of the cases the authorities were required to comply with the legal requirements before taking action against the appellants. 9. It is settled principle of law that in cases involving allegation of serious nature, inquiry is required to be conducted by the Inquiry Officer or Inquiry Committee, appointed by the competent authority and on receiving finding of the inquiry the competent authority before passing an order under section 3 subsection (2)(a) and (b) shall inform the accused in writing of the action proposed to be taken in regard to them and the grounds of action while giving them reasonable time of showing cause against the action. A detailed procedure has been given under section 5 of the Ordinance, 2000 whereby the Inquiry Officer or Inquiry Committee is required to communicate to the accused the charges along with statement of allegations, requiring the accused to submit written defence within 7 days, examine the oral or documentary evidence produced for and against the charge while giving opportunity of cross-examination to the civil servants. It is evident from record that in the instant cases one sided inquiry has been conducted by the Inquiry Officer without issuing show-cause notices to the appellants and providing them an opportunity of hearing which resulted into miscarriage of justice. 10. During the time of arguments it was brought to our notice that the then incumbent officials of Education Department involved in issuance of fake/bogus appointment orders have been convicted by the competent court of law and their convictions were upheld upto the honourable Supreme Court of Pakistan and the appointment orders and service books were found bogus by the Inquiry Committee as such, the order dated 17-3-2003 will remain intact till final disposal of the departmental representations filed by the appellants. 11. For the foregoing reasons, the cases are remanded to the competent authority i.e, Secretary Education Balochistan for disposing the representations of appellants within three months inclusive of all facts, findings. The appellants are at liberty to file representations, in case they did not file earlier so that they get the opportunity of hearing. 12. File after completion be consigned to record. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Balochistan Service Tribunal Judge(s): Muhammad Hashim Khan Kakar, Muhammad Anwar Khan, Muhammad Ibrahim Baloch Title: ABDUL NABI and others vs GOVERNMENT OF BALOCHISTAN through Secretary Education, Quetta and others Case No.: Service Appeals Nos.105, 183, 184, 186, 107 to 122, 124 to 128, 132 to 135 of 2004 Date of Judgment: 2009-10-30 Reported As: 2010 P L C (C.S.) 1136 Result: Case remanded Judgment JUDGMENT ' MUHAMMAD HASHIM KHAN KAKAR (CHAIRMAN).--- This judgment shall dispose of S.As. Nos.105 to 128 of 2004 132 to 135 of 2005 and 183, 184 of 2005 as in all these matters common question of law and fact is involved. 2. These appeals have been preferred by the appellants against the impugned order dated 17-3-2003 passed by the respondents whereby the services of the appellants have been terminated who at the relevant time were performing their duties as Teachers in different schools. As per appellants their services were terminated through impugned order without any notice or giving them opportunity of hearing. It is stated they being dissatisfied preferred departmental appeals but the same were not disposed of and lastly fineing no other way out, the appellants approached this Tribunal. 2-A. The respondents contested the appeals by filing written statements challenging the maintainability of appeals on the ground of limitation. It is stated that no departmental appeals were preferred as required under section 9 of Balochistan Province Removal from Service (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000. On merits it is stated that an inquiry was conducted by the committee comprising Haji Abdul Manan Deputy Director of Education (Schools) Balochistan Quetta and Haji Abdul Ghaffar Khudazai, ADEO Loralai. Who after inquiry found the appointment order, service books of the appellant fake one. 3. We have heard learned counsel for the appellants, Advocate-General for the respondents and have gone through the record minutely. 4. Admittedly the above mentioned appeals are time barred but before dilating upon the question of limitation, it would be appropriate to reproduce the contents of impugned order dated 17-3-2003:--- "Consequent upon the complaints received in the Directorate of Education (S) Balochistan, Quetta that some persons have got bogus/fake appointment orders, the Director of Education (Schools) Balochistan, Quetta vide order No,19881-19950/EB dated the 23rd November, 2002 has appointed an Inquiry Committee to conduct informal inquiry for scrutinizing such Appointment Orders, Service Books and other relevant documents throughout the Province. According to the report of the inquiry committee, the documents of the following officials were found fake/bogus therefore, the Secretary Government of Balochisan, Education Department Quetta being competent authority ordered to terminate the services of the following with immediate effect under Balochistan Province Removal from Service (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000. He further ordered Director of Education (Schools) Balochistan/Executive District Officer Education and Drawing and Disbursing Officers concerned to lodge F.I.R. Against these bogus employees for making fraud with the Government and given loss to the Government exchequer." 5. It appears from bare reading of the contents of impugned order that on certain allegations amounting to misconduct, fraud, cheating the appellants have been dismissed from service while imposing major penalty. It clearly amounted to a stigma on appellants character and in all fairness they ought to have been given an opportunity of explaining their positions before passing impugned order. The principle of Natural Justice. "audi alteram partem" ' (No one should be condemned un-heard) is deemed to be a part of every statute unless its application is specifically excluded. 6. The impugned order shows and suggests to believe that about 119 teachers have been removed from service on the ground of finding their appointment orders, service books fake and bogus. Before passing the impugned order no opportunity was provided to the appellants in order to defend themselves. The impugned order is the out come of unilateral proceeding informal inquiry and the same is violative of the principle of Natural Justice and is liable to be declared without lawful authority and of no legal effect. 7. We are conscious of the fact that the appellants have been removed from service by the authority under the provisions of Balochistan Province Removal from Service (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000 and the competent authority under section 5, subsection (4) may dispense with the inquiry under subsection (1) subject to recording of reasons in writing for not doing so. 8. It is evident from record that certain allegations of serious nature amounting misconduct, fraud, cheating and misrepresentation have been levelled against the appellants, as such, in such peculiar circumstances of the cases the authorities were required to comply with the legal requirements before taking action against the appellants. 9. It is settled principle of law that in cases involving allegation of serious nature, inquiry is required to be conducted by the Inquiry Officer or Inquiry Committee, appointed by the competent authority and on receiving finding of the inquiry the competent authority before passing an order under section 3 subsection (2)(a) and (b) shall inform the accused in writing of the action proposed to be taken in regard to them and the grounds of action while giving them reasonable time of showing cause against the action. A detailed procedure has been given under section 5 of the Ordinance, 2000 whereby the Inquiry Officer or Inquiry Committee is required to communicate to the accused the charges along with statement of allegations, requiring the accused to submit written defence within 7 days, examine the oral or documentary evidence produced for and against the charge while giving opportunity of cross-examination to the civil servants. It is evident from record that in the instant cases one sided inquiry has been conducted by the Inquiry Officer without issuing show-cause notices to the appellants and providing them an opportunity of hearing which resulted into miscarriage of justice. 10. During the time of arguments it was brought to our notice that the then incumbent officials of Education Department involved in issuance of fake/bogus appointment orders have been convicted by the competent court of law and their convictions were upheld upto the honourable Supreme Court of Pakistan and the appointment orders and service books were found bogus by the Inquiry Committee as such, the order dated 17-3-2003 will remain intact till final disposal of the departmental representations filed by the appellants. 11. For the foregoing reasons, the cases are remanded to the competent authority i.e, Secretary Education Balochistan for disposing the representations of appellants within three months inclusive of all facts, findings. The appellants are at liberty to file representations, in case they did not file earlier so that they get the opportunity of hearing. 12. File after completion be consigned to record. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem