EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark AFREEN KHAN vs FARAMOZ KHAN T-8 of 2014 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 1 Coram 3 Appeallant: AFREEN KHAN Respondant: FARAMOZ KHAN Result: Order accordingly Judgment Date: 2018-03-17 Court: Bar Council Tribunal Judges: Shah Jehan Khan Swati Noor Alam Khan Muhammad Ibrahim Khan Citations Advocates Statutes 2018 Y L R 1409 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT JUSTICE MOHAMMAD IBRAHIM KHAN, CHAIRMAN ---The proceedings calling for cancellation of license of Faramoz Khan Advocate having undergone initiation with an application is addressed to Secretary Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Bar Council Peshawar proffered by Afreen Khan a resident of Banr Mingora Swat. It recurs to the educational qualification of Faramoz Khan Advocate from passing of S.S.C. exam under Roll No, 11540 December 1967, Bachelor of Arts (Graduation) under Roll No, 556 in February 1976. Provisional certificate under Roll No, 233 in the year 1976/78 and Bachelor of Laws in November 1982 (Sessions 1976/78). The Advocate-Respondent however remained successful in obtaining license to practice law in subordinate Courts enrolled on 04.12.1980 for the year 1981. In addition during continuance of license he engaged in service in Family Planning Department. This act of the Respondent/advocate to have firmly obtained the license before he passed his L.L.B exam amounts to his conduct coming under the definition of the commission of cheating and fraud, thereby the license to practice in lower Courts and the Hon'ble Peshawar High Court require cancellation. 2. The Worthy members of learned Disciplinary Committee put the Respondent/advocate on pre-admission notice for 24.7.2010 and was directed to submit written reply. It was submitted on 08.01.2011, wherein various legal and factual objections were raised. These facts were however in casuistical manner repelled, the license being obtained on the basis of provisional certificate. 3. Thereafter, the learned Disciplinary Committee examined the rivals by each statement PW-1 Afreen Khan and RW-1 Faramoz Khan Advocate/ Respondent. 4. It is through an order dated 28.6.2014 for all the detailed findings highlighting the facts as contained in, the Worthy members were unanimous with the recommendation that the Respondent/ advocate has committed cheating and fraud by obtaining license of the subordinate Courts and the Hon'ble High Court calling for' cancellation. However by the impugned order license of both the subordinate Courts and Hon'ble High Court remained under suspension. 5. Before the Tribunal, the parties appeared on 15.4.2017 and on this day a detailed order was passed wherein all facts under narration have been mentioned. This order sheet serves the purpose of show-cause notice as to why not extreme measures be taken for a definite penalty of misconduct under Section 41 of the Legal Practitioners and Bar Council Act, 1973, which provides punishment for Advocates for misconduct, removal from practice and imposition of fine may be ordered if the show-cause notice is not properly explained. 6. Upon request on 20.5.2017 the Respondent/advocate submitted reply to the show-cause notice which is self-explanatory. 7. We have afforded a fair opportunity to the Respondent/Advocate, not only heard in person, rather his learned counsel namely Qazi Zaki-ud-Din Advocate was also heard with vehemence. 8. There can be said without embellishment that Respondent/advocate Faramoz Khan on the face of record regarding obtaining his license of subordinate Courts on 04.12.1980 is much earlier anticipated than qualifying his LL.B exam in November 1982. This fact is truly admitted by the Respondent/advocate in his cross-examination, examined as RW¬1. The relevant cross-examination pertaining to his admission is reproduced as under:-- In the wake of provisional certificate found bogus which is Dera Ismail Khan dated 21.5.1980 when the Respondent/Advocate has successfully obtained his LL.B degree in November 1982. When absolutely the degree of LL.B was not in existence, suffice it to say, this complaint is coming true. We are conciliatory with a solid opinion for implementing our order holding the Respondent/Advocate Faramoz Khan to have squarely been found cheating and committing fraud with the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Bar Council at the time of forwarding of his application for obtaining the license of the subordinate Courts and even of the Hon'ble High Court. The conduct of the Advocate/Respondent in suppressing such material facts from Enrolment Committee is highly deplorable and unbecoming of the legal fraternity who enjoys very high and esteemed position in. society. In this regard reliance is placed on 1996 MLD 513 (Bar Council Tribunal NWFP) "Qamar Zaman Shinwari v. S. Nadir Shah Gillani Advocate." His licenses to practice law, dated 04.12.1980 of the subordinate Courts as well as before the Hon'ble Peshawar High Court dated 22.01.2011 stand cancelled. Due to his financial prevailing status fine is not imposed upon the Respondent/Advocate as he is complaining about scarcity of the resources on account of his poor practice being lawyer, but even then his cancellation of license of the subordinate Courts and the Hon'ble High Court will serve the purpose as response to his misconduct for committing Pakhtunkhwa Bar Council. The office of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Bar Council shall forthwith issue a Notification to the extent of cancellation of licenses of the Respondent/advocate of both the subordinate Courts and of Hon'ble Peshawar High Court and be duly communicated to all concerned. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Bar Council Tribunal Judge(s): Shah Jehan Khan Swati, Noor Alam Khan, Muhammad Ibrahim Khan Title: AFREEN KHAN vs FARAMOZ KHAN Case No.: T-8 of 2014 Date of Judgment: 2018-03-17 Reported As: 2018 Y L R 1409 Result: Order accordingly Judgment JUDGMENT JUSTICE MOHAMMAD IBRAHIM KHAN, CHAIRMAN ---The proceedings calling for cancellation of license of Faramoz Khan Advocate having undergone initiation with an application is addressed to Secretary Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Bar Council Peshawar proffered by Afreen Khan a resident of Banr Mingora Swat. It recurs to the educational qualification of Faramoz Khan Advocate from passing of S.S.C. exam under Roll No, 11540 December 1967, Bachelor of Arts (Graduation) under Roll No, 556 in February 1976. Provisional certificate under Roll No, 233 in the year 1976/78 and Bachelor of Laws in November 1982 (Sessions 1976/78). The Advocate-Respondent however remained successful in obtaining license to practice law in subordinate Courts enrolled on 04.12.1980 for the year 1981. In addition during continuance of license he engaged in service in Family Planning Department. This act of the Respondent/advocate to have firmly obtained the license before he passed his L.L.B exam amounts to his conduct coming under the definition of the commission of cheating and fraud, thereby the license to practice in lower Courts and the Hon'ble Peshawar High Court require cancellation. 2. The Worthy members of learned Disciplinary Committee put the Respondent/advocate on pre-admission notice for 24.7.2010 and was directed to submit written reply. It was submitted on 08.01.2011, wherein various legal and factual objections were raised. These facts were however in casuistical manner repelled, the license being obtained on the basis of provisional certificate. 3. Thereafter, the learned Disciplinary Committee examined the rivals by each statement PW-1 Afreen Khan and RW-1 Faramoz Khan Advocate/ Respondent. 4. It is through an order dated 28.6.2014 for all the detailed findings highlighting the facts as contained in, the Worthy members were unanimous with the recommendation that the Respondent/ advocate has committed cheating and fraud by obtaining license of the subordinate Courts and the Hon'ble High Court calling for' cancellation. However by the impugned order license of both the subordinate Courts and Hon'ble High Court remained under suspension. 5. Before the Tribunal, the parties appeared on 15.4.2017 and on this day a detailed order was passed wherein all facts under narration have been mentioned. This order sheet serves the purpose of show-cause notice as to why not extreme measures be taken for a definite penalty of misconduct under Section 41 of the Legal Practitioners and Bar Council Act, 1973, which provides punishment for Advocates for misconduct, removal from practice and imposition of fine may be ordered if the show-cause notice is not properly explained. 6. Upon request on 20.5.2017 the Respondent/advocate submitted reply to the show-cause notice which is self-explanatory. 7. We have afforded a fair opportunity to the Respondent/Advocate, not only heard in person, rather his learned counsel namely Qazi Zaki-ud-Din Advocate was also heard with vehemence. 8. There can be said without embellishment that Respondent/advocate Faramoz Khan on the face of record regarding obtaining his license of subordinate Courts on 04.12.1980 is much earlier anticipated than qualifying his LL.B exam in November 1982. This fact is truly admitted by the Respondent/advocate in his cross-examination, examined as RW¬1. The relevant cross-examination pertaining to his admission is reproduced as under:-- In the wake of provisional certificate found bogus which is Dera Ismail Khan dated 21.5.1980 when the Respondent/Advocate has successfully obtained his LL.B degree in November 1982. When absolutely the degree of LL.B was not in existence, suffice it to say, this complaint is coming true. We are conciliatory with a solid opinion for implementing our order holding the Respondent/Advocate Faramoz Khan to have squarely been found cheating and committing fraud with the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Bar Council at the time of forwarding of his application for obtaining the license of the subordinate Courts and even of the Hon'ble High Court. The conduct of the Advocate/Respondent in suppressing such material facts from Enrolment Committee is highly deplorable and unbecoming of the legal fraternity who enjoys very high and esteemed position in. society. In this regard reliance is placed on 1996 MLD 513 (Bar Council Tribunal NWFP) "Qamar Zaman Shinwari v. S. Nadir Shah Gillani Advocate." His licenses to practice law, dated 04.12.1980 of the subordinate Courts as well as before the Hon'ble Peshawar High Court dated 22.01.2011 stand cancelled. Due to his financial prevailing status fine is not imposed upon the Respondent/Advocate as he is complaining about scarcity of the resources on account of his poor practice being lawyer, but even then his cancellation of license of the subordinate Courts and the Hon'ble High Court will serve the purpose as response to his misconduct for committing Pakhtunkhwa Bar Council. The office of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Bar Council shall forthwith issue a Notification to the extent of cancellation of licenses of the Respondent/advocate of both the subordinate Courts and of Hon'ble Peshawar High Court and be duly communicated to all concerned. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem