EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark Afzaal Ahmed vs The State Criminal Petition No. 504-U1999 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 3 Appeallant: Afzaal Ahmed Respondant: The State Result: N/A Judgment Date: 2005-01-24 Court: Supreme Court of Pakistan Judges: Wajihuddin Ahmed Irshad Hasan Khan Munir A. Sheikh Citations Advocates Statutes 2005 C.L.R. 31 Judgment ORDER After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner and without expressing any opinion as to the merits of the case, and without prejudice to the rights of either party, we deem it appropriate to direct the Trial Court to finally dispose of the case within a period of three months from today, even if the proceedings are taken on day to day basis. 2. With the above observation, the petition is disposed of. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Supreme Court of Pakistan Judge(s): Wajihuddin Ahmed, Irshad Hasan Khan, Munir A. Sheikh Title: Afzaal Ahmed vs The State Case No.: Criminal Petition No. 504-U1999 Date of Judgment: 2005-01-24 Reported As: 2005 C.L.R. 31 Result: N/A Judgment ORDER After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner and without expressing any opinion as to the merits of the case, and without prejudice to the rights of either party, we deem it appropriate to direct the Trial Court to finally dispose of the case within a period of three months from today, even if the proceedings are taken on day to day basis. 2. With the above observation, the petition is disposed of. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-14 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem