EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark Agha MUHAMMAD KAZIM vs MEMBER (COLONIES), BOARD OF REVENUE, PUNJAB AND Other Civil Petition for Special Leave to Appeal No. 157-R of 1981 Writ Petition No. 3208 of 1981 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: Agha MUHAMMAD KAZIM Respondant: MEMBER (COLONIES), BOARD OF REVENUE, PUNJAB AND Other Result: Leave granted Judgment Date: 1983-11-11 Court: Supreme Court of Pakistan Judges: Shahnawaz Khan Muhammad Haleem Citations Advocates Statutes 1983 S C M R 148 Judgment ORDER MUHAMMAD HALEEM, ACTG. C. J .-Admittedly the petitioner was a sub--tenant of some land in Squares Nos. 113 and 126 (lots Nos. 7 and 16) in Chak No. 125/15-L. Tehsil Khanewal, which was leased out to his brother along-with the other squares on 22nd of August, 1968, under the Tender Scheme for a period of 10 years. On the expiry of this period his brother applied for proprietary rights of the laud leased out to him. He was allowed to retain lots Nos. 5 and 14 which was entered in his name as "Khud Kasht" : but as for land included in the other lots, the grant was denied to him as he did not till the soil and instead the petitioner was recorded as a sub-tenant. The eligibility of the petitioner to retain it as a sub-tenant was not recognized as it was held that he was an Advocate and practised at Khanewal and therefore, he could not be regarded as the "actual tiller" by virtue of a circular of the Board of Revenue dated 7th of February, 1978. He was further asked to surrender the land in his possession. He appealed to the Commissioner and also filed a revision before the Board of Revenue but did not succeed. His Constitutional Petition was also dismissed. This submission needs consideration as undisputedly he was cultivating the land as a sub-tenant of his brother who was the original lessee of the land and was found as ineligible to purchase the proprietary rights under the conditions laid down in this Notification. Accordingly, we would grant leave to appeal to the petitioner. Security for costs Rs. 2,000. In the meantime status quo as to possession. The appeal arising out of his petition shall be heard on the present record with liberty to the parties to file additional documents, if any. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Supreme Court of Pakistan Judge(s): Shahnawaz Khan, Muhammad Haleem Title: Agha MUHAMMAD KAZIM vs MEMBER (COLONIES), BOARD OF REVENUE, PUNJAB AND Other Case No.: Civil Petition for Special Leave to Appeal No. 157-R of 1981 Writ Petition No. 3208 of 1981 Date of Judgment: 1983-11-11 Reported As: 1983 S C M R 148 Result: Leave granted Judgment ORDER MUHAMMAD HALEEM, ACTG. C. J .-Admittedly the petitioner was a sub--tenant of some land in Squares Nos. 113 and 126 (lots Nos. 7 and 16) in Chak No. 125/15-L. Tehsil Khanewal, which was leased out to his brother along-with the other squares on 22nd of August, 1968, under the Tender Scheme for a period of 10 years. On the expiry of this period his brother applied for proprietary rights of the laud leased out to him. He was allowed to retain lots Nos. 5 and 14 which was entered in his name as "Khud Kasht" : but as for land included in the other lots, the grant was denied to him as he did not till the soil and instead the petitioner was recorded as a sub-tenant. The eligibility of the petitioner to retain it as a sub-tenant was not recognized as it was held that he was an Advocate and practised at Khanewal and therefore, he could not be regarded as the "actual tiller" by virtue of a circular of the Board of Revenue dated 7th of February, 1978. He was further asked to surrender the land in his possession. He appealed to the Commissioner and also filed a revision before the Board of Revenue but did not succeed. His Constitutional Petition was also dismissed. This submission needs consideration as undisputedly he was cultivating the land as a sub-tenant of his brother who was the original lessee of the land and was found as ineligible to purchase the proprietary rights under the conditions laid down in this Notification. Accordingly, we would grant leave to appeal to the petitioner. Security for costs Rs. 2,000. In the meantime status quo as to possession. The appeal arising out of his petition shall be heard on the present record with liberty to the parties to file additional documents, if any. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-14 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem