EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark ALI NAWAZ vs MUMTAZ ALI Case No. SROR-362 of 1987 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: ALI NAWAZ Respondant: MUMTAZ ALI Result: Order accordingly Judgment Date: 1988-10-27 Court: Board of Revenue Judges: Ayaz Hussain Ansari Citations Advocates Statutes 1989 M L D 982 Judgment ORDER This is a revision petition against the order dated 27-6-1987 passed by the learned Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad Division, Hyderabad whereby he allowed the appeal of the respondent in respect of S.No.282 and 296 of Deh Fatehpur Taluka Khairpur Nathan Shah. 2. Heard the petitioner in person and the counsel for the respondent. Perused the case papers and the impugned order. 3. I have considered the case. In the present case the petitioner filed pre--emption application before the Mukhtiar kar/Tribunal, Kharrpur Nathan Shah which was rejected. The petitioner being aggrieved, filed an appeal before the Assistant Commissioner, Dadu which was also rejected and then the revision petition was filed by the petitioner before the Deputy Commissioner, Dadu. Subsequently, the Deputy Commissioner referred the matter to the Board of Revenue, Sind for further action in compliance with the directions issued by the Sind Land Commission vide its circular No.SLC-5537/73/3209, dated 4-7-1976, to the effect that on the promulgation of Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1976, all the pre-emption cases pending before the Mukhtiar kar/Tribunal, the Assistant Commissioner and the Deputy Commissioner shall be transferred to the Deputy Commissioner, Commissioner and the Board of Revenue Sind respectively. 4. Accordingly, on receipt of this case from Deputy Commissioner, Dadu the Board of Revenue, Sind after examining the pros and cons of the case, returned the case papers to the Deputy Commissioner, Dadu for taking decision in the matter, strictly on merits, by keeping in view the pre-emption laws then in force. 5. Thereafter, the Deputy Commissioner, Dadu vide his order dated 28-4-1 1985 decided the matter by allowing the right of pre-emption to the petitioner in exercise of his revisional jurisdiction and, therefore, his order achieved finality) and no further appeal or revision was legally liable before any judicial forum, as well as even before the Board of Revenue, Sind. 6. As the order dated 28-4-1985 passed by the learned Deputy Commissioner, Dadu, was in pursuance of the direction of the Board of Revenue, Sind in exercise of revisional jurisdiction had attained finality, the impugned order passed by the learned Additional Commissioner is without jurisdiction and is, therefore, nullity. 7.In the result, the present appeal/petition is disposed of accordingly with the above observation. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue Judge(s): Ayaz Hussain Ansari Title: ALI NAWAZ vs MUMTAZ ALI Case No.: Case No. SROR-362 of 1987 Date of Judgment: 1988-10-27 Reported As: 1989 M L D 982 Result: Order accordingly Judgment ORDER This is a revision petition against the order dated 27-6-1987 passed by the learned Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad Division, Hyderabad whereby he allowed the appeal of the respondent in respect of S.No.282 and 296 of Deh Fatehpur Taluka Khairpur Nathan Shah. 2. Heard the petitioner in person and the counsel for the respondent. Perused the case papers and the impugned order. 3. I have considered the case. In the present case the petitioner filed pre--emption application before the Mukhtiar kar/Tribunal, Kharrpur Nathan Shah which was rejected. The petitioner being aggrieved, filed an appeal before the Assistant Commissioner, Dadu which was also rejected and then the revision petition was filed by the petitioner before the Deputy Commissioner, Dadu. Subsequently, the Deputy Commissioner referred the matter to the Board of Revenue, Sind for further action in compliance with the directions issued by the Sind Land Commission vide its circular No.SLC-5537/73/3209, dated 4-7-1976, to the effect that on the promulgation of Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1976, all the pre-emption cases pending before the Mukhtiar kar/Tribunal, the Assistant Commissioner and the Deputy Commissioner shall be transferred to the Deputy Commissioner, Commissioner and the Board of Revenue Sind respectively. 4. Accordingly, on receipt of this case from Deputy Commissioner, Dadu the Board of Revenue, Sind after examining the pros and cons of the case, returned the case papers to the Deputy Commissioner, Dadu for taking decision in the matter, strictly on merits, by keeping in view the pre-emption laws then in force. 5. Thereafter, the Deputy Commissioner, Dadu vide his order dated 28-4-1 1985 decided the matter by allowing the right of pre-emption to the petitioner in exercise of his revisional jurisdiction and, therefore, his order achieved finality) and no further appeal or revision was legally liable before any judicial forum, as well as even before the Board of Revenue, Sind. 6. As the order dated 28-4-1985 passed by the learned Deputy Commissioner, Dadu, was in pursuance of the direction of the Board of Revenue, Sind in exercise of revisional jurisdiction had attained finality, the impugned order passed by the learned Additional Commissioner is without jurisdiction and is, therefore, nullity. 7.In the result, the present appeal/petition is disposed of accordingly with the above observation. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem