EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark ALI AND 3 OTHERS vs THE STATE-- Criminal Appeal No. 237 and Confirmation Case No. 60 of 1967 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 5 Coram 2 Appeallant: ALI AND 3 OTHERS Respondant: THE STATE-- Result: Appeal accepted Judgment Date: 1969-09-27 Court: Sindh High Court Judges: Muhammad Afzal Cheema Author Muhammad Gul Citations Advocates Statutes 1969 P Cr. L J 28 Judgment JUDGMENT MUHAMMAD AFZAL CHEEMA, J.----- This Criminal Appeal is by four appellants, namely, Durro, Arbab, Ramzan and Ali, who have been convicted by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Jacobabad, under section 305 read with section 34 of the Pakistan Penal Code, for having committed the murder of Mahmud in village Thul Naka, Police Station Jacobabad on the night between the 22nd and 23rd of September 1966. Durro and Arbab appellants were awarded extreme penalty of death, while Ramzan and Ali were sentenced to transportation for life. In addition, they were also punished with a fine of Rs. 1,000 each or one years R. I. in default of payment thereof. By the same judgment, Durro, Ramzan and Ali appellants were also convicted under section 13 (d) of the Arms Ordinance with a concurrent sentence of two years' R. I each, except in the case of Durro whose case along with that of Arbab has been referred to us for confirmation of death sentence under section 374 of the Criminal Procedure Code. This judgment will dispose of the appeal as well as the murder reference. 2. The appellants are related inter se. Ramzan appellant is son of Arbab appellant who is married to the sister of Durro appellant. Ali appellant is also nephew of Durro appellant. The parties have a background of blood-feuds. About a year prior to the occurrence, Kauro and Ghulam Muhammad brothers of Durro appellant and Dhano father of Arbab appellant were murdered for which Sajawal complainant, brother of Mahmud deceased, his cousin Bakhairo (P. W. 7) and some others were challaned. While the case was pending inquiry before the S. D. M. Nasirabad, on 21st of June 1966, which was one of the dates of hearing another clash between the parties became imminent which led to the filing of an application under section 107, Cr. P. Code by Ghulam Muhammad, a relation and co-accused with Sajawal complainant in that case in the Court of the S. D. M., Nasirabad, who assigned it to Tehsildar and F. C. M. Jhatpat for disposal. This application was still pending when Sajawal complainant and his cousin Bakhairo P. W. being apprehensive of the appellants, shifted from Rojhan, their previous place of residence to Thul Naka in the vicinity of Jacobabad. Mahmud deceased brother of Sajawal complainant who worked as a labourer at Jacobabad Aerodrome joined them later and started living with them. 3. The case of the prosecution is that on the night of the present occurrence the deceased, his brother Sajawal complainant, Mst. Sadori wife of Sajawal, and his cousin Bakhairo were asleep in the courtyard of their house in the light of a lantern when at 1-00 a. m. they woke up on the `Hakal' of the deceased who challenged and identified the four appellants accompanied by two unidentified persons, all armed with guns standing in the courtyard. Durro appellant urged his companions to open fire and so saying himself shot at the deceased followed by Arbab. The other inmates of the house, namely, Sajawal complainant (P. W. 5), his wife Sadori (P. W. 6), and his cousin Bakhairo (P. W. 7) (who also identified the appellants and the other two intruders) concealed themselves behind the heaps of bricks. Having fired several shots the six culprits including the four appellants ran away. On their departure the aforesaid three eye-witnesses found Mahmud dead with two gun-shot injuries. Report Exh. 14 was lodged by Sajawal complainant at Sadar Police Station, Jacobabad at a distance of five furlongs at 3 a.m. which was recorded by A. S. I. Ali Nawaz (P. W. 9). 4. Having recorded the first information report A. S. I. Ali Nawaz (P. W. 9) reached the spot, found the dead body of Mahmud deceased lying in the courtyard, secured 13 empties, three wads and four live cartridges from the spot and a single shoe (Jooti) vide mashirnama Exh. 9. He also took into possession blood-stained earth from the spot and sealed it into a parcel. The lantern was also secured by him vide mashirnama Exh. 8. He prepared injury statement of the deceased Exh. 10, and sent the dead body for post-mortem examination. All these mashirnamas were attested by Ghaus Bakhsh (P. W. 3). 5. Autopsy on the dead body of Mahmud deceased was performed by Doctor M. A. Jabbar, A. M. O. Civil Hospital, Jacobabad at 10-30 a.m. the same uay. On external examina--tion he found two scorched lacerated-type penetrating wounds 1" each, one on the left scapula and the other on the 5th lumber vertebra. The spinal cord, the left pleura and left lung were punctured and stomach, large intestines and spleen were injured. In the opinion of the doctor injuries were caused with a fire-arm and were individually sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature which had occurred instantaneously. The shots, according to the doctor, were fired from a close range within four feet. The relevant post-mortem examination report was Exh. 7-A. 6. On 24th of September 1966, A. S. I. Ali Nawaz (P. W. 9) arrested Ali appellant from village Rojhan. On 26th of September 1966, he arrested Arbab and Ramzan appellants from Jhatpat Jail. On 3rd October 1966, he tried the shoe secured from the spot on Arbab and Ramzan appellants which fitted on the latter and mashirnama Exh. 12 was prepared in this regard. On 7th October 1966, he secured vide mashirnama Exh. 20, a single-barelled .12 bore licensed gun No. 78149 belong--ing to Arbab appellant along with licence No. 5860 with two live cartridges which were produced by Jumma son of Ghulam Ali a relation of Arbab. On 28th October 1966, Maula Bakhsh (P. W. 1), S. H. O. Sadar, Jacobabad accompanied by A. S. I. Ali Nawaz and H. C. Mir Beg, on receipt of secret information arrested Durro from Jhatpat Road at 5 a.m. and recovered from his possession a gun and two live cartridges vide mashirnama Exh. 5. 7. The arrest of Arbab and Ramzan from Jhatpat Jail on 26th of September 1966 was effected in somewhat remarkable circumstances, and it seems necessary at this stage to refer to these circumstances in some detail, for their plea of alibi is founded on this arrest. From the statement of F. C. M. Feroze Din (P. W. 11) it appears that an application under section 107, Cr. P. Code was pending against the appellants and others. Having recorded the statement of Ghulam Muhammad petitioner the same day on 24th June 1966 the learned Magistrate issued notices under section 112, Cr. P. C. to the appellants and others. After several hearings on which no proceedings could be taken owing to non-service of processes, the learned Magistrate adjourned the case on 3rd September to 23rd of September 1966. On this day both Arbab and Ramzan appellants along with one Peero were produced before the Magistrate by Jhatpat 'Police. They offered to be bound down and were ordered by the learned Magistrate to furnish security for keeping the peace for one year but surprisingly enough were unable to furnish security. On their failure to furnish the requisite security, they were ordered to be detained. It was in these circumstances that Arbab and Ramzan were arrested on the 26th of September 1966, by A. S. I. Ali Nawaz (P. W. 9). The relevant order is Exh. 38. On inspection of the Station diary of Jhatpat Police Station, A. S. 1. Ali Nawaz found that vide entry No. 1.5 dated the 22nd of September 1966, made at 12-30 p.m. H. C. Muhammad Nawaz and F. C. Nazar Muhammad of that police station had proceeded to effect service of the warrants issued by F. C. M., Jacobabad against the appellants in connection with proceedings under section 107, Cr. P. Code. A subsequent entry No. 20 made at 4-30 p.m. the day showed that the aforesaid two Police officials had brought under arrest to the Police Station, Arbab and Ramzan appellants along with one Peero who was also wanted in security proceedings. Thus after having been kept under detention in the police lock-up during the crucial night between 22nd and 23rd of September 1966, they were produced before the F. C. M., Jhatpat on the following day at 10 a.m. and were ultimately arrested in the instant case on 26th of September, 1966. It was on the basis of this documentary evidence that these two appellants raised the plea of alibi, and in support of this plea produced in defence Khair Muhammad M. H. C. of Jhatpat Police Station (D. W. 1) along with the Station diary containing the relevant entries, copies of which are Exhs. 34 to 37. The plea was disbelieved by the learned Sessions Judge who considered it all a sheer fabrication made by the appellants .in collusion with the police in a pre-planned manner. 8. After the completion of the investigation the appellants were sent up to stand trial for an offence under section 302 read with section 34, P. P. C. They pleaded not guilty to the charge. Durro appellant denied his arrest from Jhatpat Road on 28th October 1966 as also recovery of the gun from his possession along with two live cartridges. On the contrary, he took the position that he learnt about his implication in the case from Haji Ahmad Khan a respectable aamindar of the Ilaqa who produced him at the Police Station. I his gentleman is a Graduate and Chairman of the Union Committee Idgah Taluka appeared as D. W. 2 and stated that he had produced Durro appellant on the evening of 26th of October 1966 at the Police Station as directed by the Sub-Inspector. In answer to a Court question he stated that he had brought him from his village. The case of Ali appellant was one of denial simpliciter, who stated that he was a prosecution witness in the murder case against Sajawal complainant and others and that the' P. Ws. were deposing against him on account of enmity as he did not submit to the pressure of the complainant party to resile from his statement. The position taken up by Arbab and Ramzan appellants has already been mentioned. The learned Sessions Judge in his forty-page judgment placed implicit reliance on the testimony of the eye-witnesses, namely, Sajawal, his wife Sadori and cousin Bakhairo, supported by the medical evidence and that of recoveries. As stated earlier, the plea of alibi raised by Arbab and Ramzan appellants was rejected as a sheer forgery and fabrication. Consequently the appellants were found guilty and sentenced as detailed earlier. 10. At this stage, it would be convenient to advert to an application filed by the learned Assistant Advocate-General under section 375/428, Cr. P. Code for examination of the Ballistic Expert whose report with regard to the firing of the crime empties from the guns recovered though placed on the record had not been formally proved. The application was strongly resisted before us by Mr. A. K. Brohi on the ground inter alia of its being belated and the concession made by the A. P. P. giving up the remaining P. Ws. including the Ballistic Expert. Reliance was placed in this regard on Ghulam Muhammad v. The State ( P L D 1957 Lah. 263 ) (an authority which was cited by the learned Assistant Advocate-General in support of his own contention), besides Ali and another v. Crown ( P L D 1952 F C 71 ) and Nawab Yousuf v. The State ( P L D 1961 Kar. 150 ). Lastly, it was contended by Mr. Brohi that the prosecution case had absolutely no legs to stand and that even if the Ballistic Expert's report were deemed to have been duly proved and received in evidence, this did not in the least alter the position, and as such the allowing of the application and the consequent examination of the expert was merely a futile exercise causing unnecessary delay in the disposal of the case. 11. Having carefully considered the matter in the light of the aforesaid authorities and after having been taken through the relevant record, we agree with Mr. A. K. Brohi that because of the infirmities in the direct evidence produced in the case, (which we will presently notice) it would be futile to adjourn the appeal, for the examination of the Ballistic Expert, which needless to say is relevant only as corroborative of the direct evidence. Obviously, no amount of corroboration can rehabilitate direct evidence which is otherwise false or unreliable. Then there is the extraordinary fact that the two guns and the crime empties recovered during the investigation were never made into sealed parcels, so as to obviate their being tampered with, till they were received in the Forensic Science Laboratory. This would demonstrate the futility of the evidence of the Ballistic Expert and therefore, we refuse the application for his examination at this stage. 12. Mr. Brohi, the learned counsel for the appellants raised the following contentions before us: (1) That the impugned judgment was perverse being contrary to the weight of evidence and was based on fallacious reasoning. (2) That in the admitted background of previous bad-blood between the parties, there was not a single independent and disinterested witness in the case. (3) That the testimony of the three so-called eye-witnesses was discrepant, inconsistent and unconvincing. (4) That the so-called corroborative evidence of the recovery Juti, the guns and the crime empties considered in the light of the alleged circumstances is of no consequence; and (5) That the learned Sessions Judge had erred in discarding the plea of alibi raised by Arbab and Ramzan on the basis of unimpeachable evidence. 13. No doubt the F. I. R. was promptly lodged at the Police Station within two hours of the occurrence in which the four appellants were named, yet on analysis the evidence strongly suggests that the assertion of the three eye-witnesses, namely, Sajawal complainant, his wife Mst. Sadori and his brother Bakhairo, as having clearly identified the four appellants is not free from doubt and has to be taken with a grain of salt. The statement of Sajawal complainant appearing as P. W. 5 at the trial shows on the one hand a marked improvement on his police report and a material discrepancy on the other which cannot be easily brushed aside. In the first information report he positively stated: "We concealed ourselves behind the heaps of bricks lying there out of fear". From "we" he obviously meant himself, his wife Mst. Sadori (P. W. 6) and his cousin Bakhairo (P. W. 7). On the contrary, at the trial he deposed: "We concealed ourselves under the cots." Later, in cross-examination he stated that he could not say if Bakhairo and Sadori hid themselves underneath the cots. The recovery of Juti Exh. 9 which fitted Ramzan appellant, and the arrival of Muhammad Bakhsh (P. W. 11) whose testimony is in the nature of res gestae were strongly relied upon in the judgment as a corroborative piece of evidence of the ocular evidence. But the learned trial Judge lightly brushed aside the all important fact that Muhammad Bakhsh P. W. is not named in the first information report as having arrived at the spot. Secondly, before the Committing Magistrate, the witness had stated, that when he reached the spot, the complainant had told him, that Durro appellant had killed the deceased and did not then name Arbab appellant, as he did in the Sessions Court. As to the recovery of Juti Exh. 9, it could possibly be argued that it being night time, the Juti remained unnoticed till it was recovered by A. S. I. Ali Nawaz (P. W. 9) on his arrival at the spot. But another significant fact, namely, the burning of the lamp which enabled the identification of the appellants is a double-edged weapon. Obviously from the back--ground of the case it appears that in all probability the appellants' targets should have been Sajawal and Bakhairo who were directly involved in the triple murder case of their relations. It were they who had shifted to Thul Naka in apprehension of vendetta. Mahmud deceased only joined them later. It is clear, therefore, that the appellants should have come to wreak vengeance on Sajawal and Bakhairo. If the lamp was burning as the eye--witnesses would have us believe it should have equally facilitated to the appellants the identification of the two aforesaid P. Ws. Again, if six persons armed with guns had gone fully prepared to avenge the triple murder of their dear ones, they should have assessed before hand the amount of resistance they would be likely to meet. Admittedly there was no other person present in the house except the deceased and the three P. Ws. who were taken unawares at mid-night by six gunmen suddenly opening fire. While on the one hand there appears to be no plausible explanation as to why the assailants should not have been able to discover their real targets, namely, Sajawal and Bakhairo particularly when the latter admitted that he could see the appellants and the appellants could see him in the light of the lamp. It is equally improbable as to why did the appellants and their two unidentified companions run away after having killed the deceased, and should have spared Sajawal and Bakhairo against whom the appellants had the prime motive. Again, it appears extremely doubtful whether the eye-witnesses who placed in such a predicament and each seeking shelter behind the bricks or underneath the cot should have been able even to clearly see the occurrence of which elaborate details were later given by them including Sadori (P. W. 6) who would have us believe that she remained so calm and composed that she was able to hood--wink the assailants into the belief that her husband and Bakhairo were not present in the house which being a small place was well lit by a lamp. Yet another significant point which notwithstanding the lavish compliments paid by the learned trial Judge to the truthfulness of the eye-witnesses makes their veracity rather doubtful is the existence of the gunshot holes on the sheet which according to the P. Ws. was put by Sajawal on the dead body of his brother after the occurrence. Sajawal stated in cross-examination: "I found my brother on the ground after the accused had left. I put the sheet over my brother. I picked up the sheet from the cot of Mahmud." Again, none of the eye-witnesses seems to be quite clear as to whether the deceased was running, standing or sleeping when he received the two fatal injuries. Sajawal stated: "I cannot say if my brother was standing, sitting or sleeping on the cot when he was fired at. I cannot say if my brother was standing on the cot or on the ground at the time of firing, but he was standing." Bakhairo P. W. had clearly stated before the police that the deceased had slept with a sheet over. The picking of the sheet from the cot of the deceased and putting it over his dead body as admitted by Sajawal would suggest that the deceased had covered himself with the sheet .when he was, hit and probably lay on one side: Although Mst. Sadori stated at the trial that the deceased was standing on the ground and fell down after receiving two shots, she had stated before the police that on getting the first shot, he had started running. She even went back on her police statement that she had concealed herself. Unfortunately, in the absence of exit wounds, the medical evidence does not give any clear indication of the position of the deceased at the time of receiving the fatal injuries which could be spelt out from the direction of the wounds. Thus the discrepancies in the statements of the P. Ws. as to whether they had concealed themselves in panic behind the heap of bricks of which we find no indication in the site-plan, or underneath their cots whose location is not indicated either, coupled with the existence of the gunshot holes on the sheet and considered in the light of the probabilities of the circumstances, the account given by the eye-witnesses is far from convincing. 14. We are perfectly conscious of the principle that the evaluation of evidence by the trial Court which has the advantage of seeing and studying the demeanour of a witness should not lightly be interfered with. From a perusal of the judgment under appeal, it seems to us however, that the learned trial Judge was firstly obsessed by the dubious character of the evidence produced in support of plea of alibi by Arbab and Ramzan appellants. Then we cannot avoid the impression that the trial Judge was carried away by the existence of a strongmotive in the appellants against the complainant and Bakhairo P. W. This seems to have blurred his view and prevented him to hold the scales even while weighing the ocular evidence and thereby he fell into an error of treating the existence of motive and the suspicious nature of the evidence in support of the plea of alibi, as furnishing a "strong corroborative evidence" of the ocular evidence, notwithstanding its partisan character. 15. As to the plea of alibi raised by Arbab and Ramzan appellants, it may be stated at once that in view of the established motive, one would naturally be led to think that it were the appellants who should have been responsible for this murder. We are not quite satisfied that the documentary evidence produced to support the plea of alibi has been so shattered and discredited as to be justifiably characterised as a mere forgery and fabrication. At the same time the possibility of the two appellants having colluded with the police of Jhatpat secured false entries in the police record with a view to furnish a proofof alibi is not inconceivable. But other alternatives are equally possible. For instance, the appellants might have procured the services of hired assassins for the purpose, to one of whom Arbab might as well have given his licensed gun which was later produced before the police by his relation Jumman. Such a situation is not impossible : rather, we should say that it is the usual modus operandi of persons, who in view of their professed enmity with the complainant party and having reasons to be implicated, would in order to escape legal consequences of the act for the commission of which they might be the prime movers having conspired for the same resort to such a strategy. 16. Having carefully gone through the statement of Khair Muhammad (D. W. 1) who at the relevant time was Muharrir Head Constable at Jhatpat Police Station and produced the Station diary containing entries relating to the arrest and detention of Arbab and Ramzan at the Police lock-up on the night between 22nd and 23rd of September 1966, we have not been able to find anything which could give the slightest indication of the entries being fake, nor is there any note by the learned trial Judge showing that the relevant entries of which copies are placed on the record consisted of loose sheets which could easily have been forged or inserted subsequently, as observed by him. These entries were specifically put by the defence to A. S. I. Ali Nawaz (P. W. 9) who had examined them at the time of the arrest of Arbab and Ramzan appellants from the police lock-up. What happened subsequent to the production of these two appellants before the Mukhtiarkar and F. C. M. or whether the order passed by him was proper or not are matters wholly extraneous and irrelevant to the case before us. It would be pertinent to point out that not a single question was asked by the Additional Public Prosecutor designed to show or even to suggest that these entries were interpolated in the daily diary to sustain the plea of alibi. In the circumstances, the learned trial Judge was not justified in placing reliance on 35 Cr. L J 1335 which proceeded on "utter breaking down" of the evidence of alibi justifying an inference adverse to the accused. In fact, the view taken by the learned trial Judge, particularly misconstruing the non-production in defence by the appellants of H. C. Muhammad Nawaz and F. C. Nazar Muhammad who had arrested them as a circumstance against them creates an impression as if the onus of proving their innocence is shifted to the appellants instead of the prosecution establishing its case beyond reasonable doubt. In the circumstances of the case it would be unfair to say that the plea taken by the two appellants was demonstrably false. 17. It was contended by the learned Assistant Advocate --General on the other hand that the three eye-witnesses, namely, Sajawal complainant, his wife Sadori (P. W. 6) and his cousin Bokhairo (P. W. 7) being the inmates of the house were the only natural witnesses whose testimony was rightly believed by the learn--ed trial Judge corroborated as it were by the recovery of bloodstain--ed earth from the spot, the crime empties, the recovery of the Juti which fitted Ramzan appellant and the subsequent recoveries of the two guns one belonging to Ramzan and the other secured from Durro at the time of his arrest which according to the Ballistic Expert's report (sought to be proved by way of additional evidence) had been used in the commission of the offence. In support of this argument, reliance was placed on Nazir and others v. The State ( P L D 1962 S C 269 ) and Sardar Ali v. State ( PLD 1967 SC 217 ). In the first authority, while explaining the position earlier taken in Niaz v. State (P L D 1960 S C 386) their Lordships took the view that it could not be laid down as an inflexible rule that statement of an interested witness could never be accepted without corroboration. Again on the point of corroboration it was observed: "It is not necessary that there should be the word of an independent witness supporting the story put forward by an interested witness. Corroboration may be afforded by anything in the circumstances of a case which tend sufficiently to satisfy the mind of the Court that the witness has spoken the truth. What circumstances will be sufficient as corroboration it is not possible to lay down." The learned Assistant Advocate-General particularly emphasised the two corroborating circumstances mentioned by their Lordships, namely, the number of culprits being commensurate with the nature of the attack and the naming of the persons as culprits who could be expected to join that were forthcoming in the instant case. In the second authority, their Lordships considered the recovery of blood-stained articles from the place of beating of the deceased in the Ihata of the accused to be of sufficient corroborative force to establish the truth of the statements of the witnesses. 18. We have already tried to assess the probabilities of the case and discussed the points which tend to militate against the credibility of the eye-witnesses. This coupled with the evidence of alibi led by Arbab and Ramzan which even though approached with the utmost scepticism does not exclude the possibility of their having manoeuvred to get themselves arrested after having sent some hired assassins, would clearly show that the authorities relied upon by the learned Assistant Advocate-General cannot be pressed into service which proceed on distinguishable facts. Even in these cases their Lordships of the Supreme Court were careful to observe that no hard or fast rule could be laid down as to the probative force of a certain piece of corroborative evidence. In fact both in regard to the reliability of an interested witness as also on the acceptance of a particular circumstance as furnishing corroboration, and the sufficiency or otherwise of their probative force are matters which depend on the circumstances of each case which taken together give rise to an over-all picture clear and convincing or blurred and doubtful, as the case may be In the instant case, even if it is assumed that the Juti subsequently recovered from the spot escaped the notice of the complainant and as such was not mentioned in the first information report and was later found to have fitted on the foot of Ramzan appellant, it could hardly be of any corroborative value inasmuch as the equality of the size and dimensions of the foot of one person with several others is not only possible but quite probable being a matter of common day observation. It is noteworthy that the prosecution did not examine any witness on the point of ownership of Juti and merely because it fitted Ramzan would scarcely prove that it belonged to him g as was worn by him. This is a question of fact and has to be proved by intrinsic evidence like any other fact. As regards the recovery of the licensed gun of Arbab appellant produced by his relation Jumman on 7th October 1966, it could be argued that the same had possibly been given by Arbab himself to a assassin hired by him for avenging the murder of his father. In so far as the recovery of the gun from the possession of Durro appellant at the time of his arrest is concerned, we have no hesitation in saying that this evidence proceeding on the testimony of Maula Bakhsh S. I. (P. W. 1) is far from convincing. According to the latter, Durro was arrested on the 28th of October 1966 "from Jhatpat Road at 5 a. m." on the basis of a secret information received at the police station at 3-30 a.m, when he was accompanied by A. S. I. Ali Nawaz (P. W. 9) and H. C. Mir Beg. Significantly enough the mashirnama prepared in this regard (Exh. 5) is not attested by any F member of the public and as such it does not appear to be safe to plate implicit reliance on its genuineness. The suggestion though denied was specifically put to the Sub-Inspector in cross-examination that Durro appellant had been produced before him by Haji Ahmad Khan Jamali on 26th of October 3 966, at 4-00 p. m., at Police Station Sadar, Jacobabad and that the gun and the cartridges were foisted on him. It may be observed that this gun was an unlicensed arm. Haji Ahmad Khan Jamali who was admitted by S. I. Maula Bakhsh to be a highly educated zamindar appeared as D. W. 2 to depose that it was he who had produced Durro at the police station. This gentleman who is a zamindar and Chairnnan of the Union Committee Idgah Taluka Jacobabad was not at all cross-examined by the learned Public Prosecutor in order to shake his credit. Furthermore, as pointed out already the gum was never sealed and there is no evidence that the crime empties and guns were not tampered with at any stage till their delivery at the Forensic Science Laboratory. Therefore, in the peculiar circumstances of the case, the recovery of Juri Exh. 91 and gun are entirely unavailing as corroborative evidence in the case. 19. Before disposing of the case of Durro, we may also refer to his alleged abscondence which has been construed by the learned trial Judge as a corroborative circumstance against him. It was never the prosecution's case that efforts had been made by the Investigating Officer to arrest this appellant or that he ha d absconded or that some coercive measures for his arrest lead been resorted to. In fact, a reference to his absconding is conspicuous by its absence in the statements of the two Investigating Officers, namely, S. I. Maula Bakhsh (P. W. 1) and A. S. I. Ali Nawaz (P. W. 9). It was only in answer to a question put by the defence that the former stated that before 28th of October 1966, he had tried to find accused Durro. No inference of abscondence can be raised on the basis of this bare observation. 20. Having considered all the pros and cons of the case, we are clearly of the view that the guilt of the four appellants is not established beyond reasonable doubt. In consequence, giving the appellants the benefit of doubt, we allow the appeal, set aside their convictions and sentences. They are acquitted of all the charges and should be set at liberty if not required in any other case. In the circumstances we decline to confirm the sentence of death awarded to Durro and Arbab appellants. The fine if paid shall be refunded to them. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Sindh High Court Judge(s): Muhammad Afzal Cheema, Muhammad Gul Title: ALI AND 3 OTHERS vs THE STATE-- Case No.: Criminal Appeal No. 237 and Confirmation Case No. 60 of 1967 Date of Judgment: 1969-09-27 Reported As: 1969 P Cr. L J 28 Result: Appeal accepted Judgment JUDGMENT MUHAMMAD AFZAL CHEEMA, J.----- This Criminal Appeal is by four appellants, namely, Durro, Arbab, Ramzan and Ali, who have been convicted by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Jacobabad, under section 305 read with section 34 of the Pakistan Penal Code, for having committed the murder of Mahmud in village Thul Naka, Police Station Jacobabad on the night between the 22nd and 23rd of September 1966. Durro and Arbab appellants were awarded extreme penalty of death, while Ramzan and Ali were sentenced to transportation for life. In addition, they were also punished with a fine of Rs. 1,000 each or one years R. I. in default of payment thereof. By the same judgment, Durro, Ramzan and Ali appellants were also convicted under section 13 (d) of the Arms Ordinance with a concurrent sentence of two years' R. I each, except in the case of Durro whose case along with that of Arbab has been referred to us for confirmation of death sentence under section 374 of the Criminal Procedure Code. This judgment will dispose of the appeal as well as the murder reference. 2. The appellants are related inter se. Ramzan appellant is son of Arbab appellant who is married to the sister of Durro appellant. Ali appellant is also nephew of Durro appellant. The parties have a background of blood-feuds. About a year prior to the occurrence, Kauro and Ghulam Muhammad brothers of Durro appellant and Dhano father of Arbab appellant were murdered for which Sajawal complainant, brother of Mahmud deceased, his cousin Bakhairo (P. W. 7) and some others were challaned. While the case was pending inquiry before the S. D. M. Nasirabad, on 21st of June 1966, which was one of the dates of hearing another clash between the parties became imminent which led to the filing of an application under section 107, Cr. P. Code by Ghulam Muhammad, a relation and co-accused with Sajawal complainant in that case in the Court of the S. D. M., Nasirabad, who assigned it to Tehsildar and F. C. M. Jhatpat for disposal. This application was still pending when Sajawal complainant and his cousin Bakhairo P. W. being apprehensive of the appellants, shifted from Rojhan, their previous place of residence to Thul Naka in the vicinity of Jacobabad. Mahmud deceased brother of Sajawal complainant who worked as a labourer at Jacobabad Aerodrome joined them later and started living with them. 3. The case of the prosecution is that on the night of the present occurrence the deceased, his brother Sajawal complainant, Mst. Sadori wife of Sajawal, and his cousin Bakhairo were asleep in the courtyard of their house in the light of a lantern when at 1-00 a. m. they woke up on the `Hakal' of the deceased who challenged and identified the four appellants accompanied by two unidentified persons, all armed with guns standing in the courtyard. Durro appellant urged his companions to open fire and so saying himself shot at the deceased followed by Arbab. The other inmates of the house, namely, Sajawal complainant (P. W. 5), his wife Sadori (P. W. 6), and his cousin Bakhairo (P. W. 7) (who also identified the appellants and the other two intruders) concealed themselves behind the heaps of bricks. Having fired several shots the six culprits including the four appellants ran away. On their departure the aforesaid three eye-witnesses found Mahmud dead with two gun-shot injuries. Report Exh. 14 was lodged by Sajawal complainant at Sadar Police Station, Jacobabad at a distance of five furlongs at 3 a.m. which was recorded by A. S. I. Ali Nawaz (P. W. 9). 4. Having recorded the first information report A. S. I. Ali Nawaz (P. W. 9) reached the spot, found the dead body of Mahmud deceased lying in the courtyard, secured 13 empties, three wads and four live cartridges from the spot and a single shoe (Jooti) vide mashirnama Exh. 9. He also took into possession blood-stained earth from the spot and sealed it into a parcel. The lantern was also secured by him vide mashirnama Exh. 8. He prepared injury statement of the deceased Exh. 10, and sent the dead body for post-mortem examination. All these mashirnamas were attested by Ghaus Bakhsh (P. W. 3). 5. Autopsy on the dead body of Mahmud deceased was performed by Doctor M. A. Jabbar, A. M. O. Civil Hospital, Jacobabad at 10-30 a.m. the same uay. On external examina--tion he found two scorched lacerated-type penetrating wounds 1" each, one on the left scapula and the other on the 5th lumber vertebra. The spinal cord, the left pleura and left lung were punctured and stomach, large intestines and spleen were injured. In the opinion of the doctor injuries were caused with a fire-arm and were individually sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature which had occurred instantaneously. The shots, according to the doctor, were fired from a close range within four feet. The relevant post-mortem examination report was Exh. 7-A. 6. On 24th of September 1966, A. S. I. Ali Nawaz (P. W. 9) arrested Ali appellant from village Rojhan. On 26th of September 1966, he arrested Arbab and Ramzan appellants from Jhatpat Jail. On 3rd October 1966, he tried the shoe secured from the spot on Arbab and Ramzan appellants which fitted on the latter and mashirnama Exh. 12 was prepared in this regard. On 7th October 1966, he secured vide mashirnama Exh. 20, a single-barelled .12 bore licensed gun No. 78149 belong--ing to Arbab appellant along with licence No. 5860 with two live cartridges which were produced by Jumma son of Ghulam Ali a relation of Arbab. On 28th October 1966, Maula Bakhsh (P. W. 1), S. H. O. Sadar, Jacobabad accompanied by A. S. I. Ali Nawaz and H. C. Mir Beg, on receipt of secret information arrested Durro from Jhatpat Road at 5 a.m. and recovered from his possession a gun and two live cartridges vide mashirnama Exh. 5. 7. The arrest of Arbab and Ramzan from Jhatpat Jail on 26th of September 1966 was effected in somewhat remarkable circumstances, and it seems necessary at this stage to refer to these circumstances in some detail, for their plea of alibi is founded on this arrest. From the statement of F. C. M. Feroze Din (P. W. 11) it appears that an application under section 107, Cr. P. Code was pending against the appellants and others. Having recorded the statement of Ghulam Muhammad petitioner the same day on 24th June 1966 the learned Magistrate issued notices under section 112, Cr. P. C. to the appellants and others. After several hearings on which no proceedings could be taken owing to non-service of processes, the learned Magistrate adjourned the case on 3rd September to 23rd of September 1966. On this day both Arbab and Ramzan appellants along with one Peero were produced before the Magistrate by Jhatpat 'Police. They offered to be bound down and were ordered by the learned Magistrate to furnish security for keeping the peace for one year but surprisingly enough were unable to furnish security. On their failure to furnish the requisite security, they were ordered to be detained. It was in these circumstances that Arbab and Ramzan were arrested on the 26th of September 1966, by A. S. I. Ali Nawaz (P. W. 9). The relevant order is Exh. 38. On inspection of the Station diary of Jhatpat Police Station, A. S. 1. Ali Nawaz found that vide entry No. 1.5 dated the 22nd of September 1966, made at 12-30 p.m. H. C. Muhammad Nawaz and F. C. Nazar Muhammad of that police station had proceeded to effect service of the warrants issued by F. C. M., Jacobabad against the appellants in connection with proceedings under section 107, Cr. P. Code. A subsequent entry No. 20 made at 4-30 p.m. the day showed that the aforesaid two Police officials had brought under arrest to the Police Station, Arbab and Ramzan appellants along with one Peero who was also wanted in security proceedings. Thus after having been kept under detention in the police lock-up during the crucial night between 22nd and 23rd of September 1966, they were produced before the F. C. M., Jhatpat on the following day at 10 a.m. and were ultimately arrested in the instant case on 26th of September, 1966. It was on the basis of this documentary evidence that these two appellants raised the plea of alibi, and in support of this plea produced in defence Khair Muhammad M. H. C. of Jhatpat Police Station (D. W. 1) along with the Station diary containing the relevant entries, copies of which are Exhs. 34 to 37. The plea was disbelieved by the learned Sessions Judge who considered it all a sheer fabrication made by the appellants .in collusion with the police in a pre-planned manner. 8. After the completion of the investigation the appellants were sent up to stand trial for an offence under section 302 read with section 34, P. P. C. They pleaded not guilty to the charge. Durro appellant denied his arrest from Jhatpat Road on 28th October 1966 as also recovery of the gun from his possession along with two live cartridges. On the contrary, he took the position that he learnt about his implication in the case from Haji Ahmad Khan a respectable aamindar of the Ilaqa who produced him at the Police Station. I his gentleman is a Graduate and Chairman of the Union Committee Idgah Taluka appeared as D. W. 2 and stated that he had produced Durro appellant on the evening of 26th of October 1966 at the Police Station as directed by the Sub-Inspector. In answer to a Court question he stated that he had brought him from his village. The case of Ali appellant was one of denial simpliciter, who stated that he was a prosecution witness in the murder case against Sajawal complainant and others and that the' P. Ws. were deposing against him on account of enmity as he did not submit to the pressure of the complainant party to resile from his statement. The position taken up by Arbab and Ramzan appellants has already been mentioned. The learned Sessions Judge in his forty-page judgment placed implicit reliance on the testimony of the eye-witnesses, namely, Sajawal, his wife Sadori and cousin Bakhairo, supported by the medical evidence and that of recoveries. As stated earlier, the plea of alibi raised by Arbab and Ramzan appellants was rejected as a sheer forgery and fabrication. Consequently the appellants were found guilty and sentenced as detailed earlier. 10. At this stage, it would be convenient to advert to an application filed by the learned Assistant Advocate-General under section 375/428, Cr. P. Code for examination of the Ballistic Expert whose report with regard to the firing of the crime empties from the guns recovered though placed on the record had not been formally proved. The application was strongly resisted before us by Mr. A. K. Brohi on the ground inter alia of its being belated and the concession made by the A. P. P. giving up the remaining P. Ws. including the Ballistic Expert. Reliance was placed in this regard on Ghulam Muhammad v. The State ( P L D 1957 Lah. 263 ) (an authority which was cited by the learned Assistant Advocate-General in support of his own contention), besides Ali and another v. Crown ( P L D 1952 F C 71 ) and Nawab Yousuf v. The State ( P L D 1961 Kar. 150 ). Lastly, it was contended by Mr. Brohi that the prosecution case had absolutely no legs to stand and that even if the Ballistic Expert's report were deemed to have been duly proved and received in evidence, this did not in the least alter the position, and as such the allowing of the application and the consequent examination of the expert was merely a futile exercise causing unnecessary delay in the disposal of the case. 11. Having carefully considered the matter in the light of the aforesaid authorities and after having been taken through the relevant record, we agree with Mr. A. K. Brohi that because of the infirmities in the direct evidence produced in the case, (which we will presently notice) it would be futile to adjourn the appeal, for the examination of the Ballistic Expert, which needless to say is relevant only as corroborative of the direct evidence. Obviously, no amount of corroboration can rehabilitate direct evidence which is otherwise false or unreliable. Then there is the extraordinary fact that the two guns and the crime empties recovered during the investigation were never made into sealed parcels, so as to obviate their being tampered with, till they were received in the Forensic Science Laboratory. This would demonstrate the futility of the evidence of the Ballistic Expert and therefore, we refuse the application for his examination at this stage. 12. Mr. Brohi, the learned counsel for the appellants raised the following contentions before us: (1) That the impugned judgment was perverse being contrary to the weight of evidence and was based on fallacious reasoning. (2) That in the admitted background of previous bad-blood between the parties, there was not a single independent and disinterested witness in the case. (3) That the testimony of the three so-called eye-witnesses was discrepant, inconsistent and unconvincing. (4) That the so-called corroborative evidence of the recovery Juti, the guns and the crime empties considered in the light of the alleged circumstances is of no consequence; and (5) That the learned Sessions Judge had erred in discarding the plea of alibi raised by Arbab and Ramzan on the basis of unimpeachable evidence. 13. No doubt the F. I. R. was promptly lodged at the Police Station within two hours of the occurrence in which the four appellants were named, yet on analysis the evidence strongly suggests that the assertion of the three eye-witnesses, namely, Sajawal complainant, his wife Mst. Sadori and his brother Bakhairo, as having clearly identified the four appellants is not free from doubt and has to be taken with a grain of salt. The statement of Sajawal complainant appearing as P. W. 5 at the trial shows on the one hand a marked improvement on his police report and a material discrepancy on the other which cannot be easily brushed aside. In the first information report he positively stated: "We concealed ourselves behind the heaps of bricks lying there out of fear". From "we" he obviously meant himself, his wife Mst. Sadori (P. W. 6) and his cousin Bakhairo (P. W. 7). On the contrary, at the trial he deposed: "We concealed ourselves under the cots." Later, in cross-examination he stated that he could not say if Bakhairo and Sadori hid themselves underneath the cots. The recovery of Juti Exh. 9 which fitted Ramzan appellant, and the arrival of Muhammad Bakhsh (P. W. 11) whose testimony is in the nature of res gestae were strongly relied upon in the judgment as a corroborative piece of evidence of the ocular evidence. But the learned trial Judge lightly brushed aside the all important fact that Muhammad Bakhsh P. W. is not named in the first information report as having arrived at the spot. Secondly, before the Committing Magistrate, the witness had stated, that when he reached the spot, the complainant had told him, that Durro appellant had killed the deceased and did not then name Arbab appellant, as he did in the Sessions Court. As to the recovery of Juti Exh. 9, it could possibly be argued that it being night time, the Juti remained unnoticed till it was recovered by A. S. I. Ali Nawaz (P. W. 9) on his arrival at the spot. But another significant fact, namely, the burning of the lamp which enabled the identification of the appellants is a double-edged weapon. Obviously from the back--ground of the case it appears that in all probability the appellants' targets should have been Sajawal and Bakhairo who were directly involved in the triple murder case of their relations. It were they who had shifted to Thul Naka in apprehension of vendetta. Mahmud deceased only joined them later. It is clear, therefore, that the appellants should have come to wreak vengeance on Sajawal and Bakhairo. If the lamp was burning as the eye--witnesses would have us believe it should have equally facilitated to the appellants the identification of the two aforesaid P. Ws. Again, if six persons armed with guns had gone fully prepared to avenge the triple murder of their dear ones, they should have assessed before hand the amount of resistance they would be likely to meet. Admittedly there was no other person present in the house except the deceased and the three P. Ws. who were taken unawares at mid-night by six gunmen suddenly opening fire. While on the one hand there appears to be no plausible explanation as to why the assailants should not have been able to discover their real targets, namely, Sajawal and Bakhairo particularly when the latter admitted that he could see the appellants and the appellants could see him in the light of the lamp. It is equally improbable as to why did the appellants and their two unidentified companions run away after having killed the deceased, and should have spared Sajawal and Bakhairo against whom the appellants had the prime motive. Again, it appears extremely doubtful whether the eye-witnesses who placed in such a predicament and each seeking shelter behind the bricks or underneath the cot should have been able even to clearly see the occurrence of which elaborate details were later given by them including Sadori (P. W. 6) who would have us believe that she remained so calm and composed that she was able to hood--wink the assailants into the belief that her husband and Bakhairo were not present in the house which being a small place was well lit by a lamp. Yet another significant point which notwithstanding the lavish compliments paid by the learned trial Judge to the truthfulness of the eye-witnesses makes their veracity rather doubtful is the existence of the gunshot holes on the sheet which according to the P. Ws. was put by Sajawal on the dead body of his brother after the occurrence. Sajawal stated in cross-examination: "I found my brother on the ground after the accused had left. I put the sheet over my brother. I picked up the sheet from the cot of Mahmud." Again, none of the eye-witnesses seems to be quite clear as to whether the deceased was running, standing or sleeping when he received the two fatal injuries. Sajawal stated: "I cannot say if my brother was standing, sitting or sleeping on the cot when he was fired at. I cannot say if my brother was standing on the cot or on the ground at the time of firing, but he was standing." Bakhairo P. W. had clearly stated before the police that the deceased had slept with a sheet over. The picking of the sheet from the cot of the deceased and putting it over his dead body as admitted by Sajawal would suggest that the deceased had covered himself with the sheet .when he was, hit and probably lay on one side: Although Mst. Sadori stated at the trial that the deceased was standing on the ground and fell down after receiving two shots, she had stated before the police that on getting the first shot, he had started running. She even went back on her police statement that she had concealed herself. Unfortunately, in the absence of exit wounds, the medical evidence does not give any clear indication of the position of the deceased at the time of receiving the fatal injuries which could be spelt out from the direction of the wounds. Thus the discrepancies in the statements of the P. Ws. as to whether they had concealed themselves in panic behind the heap of bricks of which we find no indication in the site-plan, or underneath their cots whose location is not indicated either, coupled with the existence of the gunshot holes on the sheet and considered in the light of the probabilities of the circumstances, the account given by the eye-witnesses is far from convincing. 14. We are perfectly conscious of the principle that the evaluation of evidence by the trial Court which has the advantage of seeing and studying the demeanour of a witness should not lightly be interfered with. From a perusal of the judgment under appeal, it seems to us however, that the learned trial Judge was firstly obsessed by the dubious character of the evidence produced in support of plea of alibi by Arbab and Ramzan appellants. Then we cannot avoid the impression that the trial Judge was carried away by the existence of a strongmotive in the appellants against the complainant and Bakhairo P. W. This seems to have blurred his view and prevented him to hold the scales even while weighing the ocular evidence and thereby he fell into an error of treating the existence of motive and the suspicious nature of the evidence in support of the plea of alibi, as furnishing a "strong corroborative evidence" of the ocular evidence, notwithstanding its partisan character. 15. As to the plea of alibi raised by Arbab and Ramzan appellants, it may be stated at once that in view of the established motive, one would naturally be led to think that it were the appellants who should have been responsible for this murder. We are not quite satisfied that the documentary evidence produced to support the plea of alibi has been so shattered and discredited as to be justifiably characterised as a mere forgery and fabrication. At the same time the possibility of the two appellants having colluded with the police of Jhatpat secured false entries in the police record with a view to furnish a proofof alibi is not inconceivable. But other alternatives are equally possible. For instance, the appellants might have procured the services of hired assassins for the purpose, to one of whom Arbab might as well have given his licensed gun which was later produced before the police by his relation Jumman. Such a situation is not impossible : rather, we should say that it is the usual modus operandi of persons, who in view of their professed enmity with the complainant party and having reasons to be implicated, would in order to escape legal consequences of the act for the commission of which they might be the prime movers having conspired for the same resort to such a strategy. 16. Having carefully gone through the statement of Khair Muhammad (D. W. 1) who at the relevant time was Muharrir Head Constable at Jhatpat Police Station and produced the Station diary containing entries relating to the arrest and detention of Arbab and Ramzan at the Police lock-up on the night between 22nd and 23rd of September 1966, we have not been able to find anything which could give the slightest indication of the entries being fake, nor is there any note by the learned trial Judge showing that the relevant entries of which copies are placed on the record consisted of loose sheets which could easily have been forged or inserted subsequently, as observed by him. These entries were specifically put by the defence to A. S. I. Ali Nawaz (P. W. 9) who had examined them at the time of the arrest of Arbab and Ramzan appellants from the police lock-up. What happened subsequent to the production of these two appellants before the Mukhtiarkar and F. C. M. or whether the order passed by him was proper or not are matters wholly extraneous and irrelevant to the case before us. It would be pertinent to point out that not a single question was asked by the Additional Public Prosecutor designed to show or even to suggest that these entries were interpolated in the daily diary to sustain the plea of alibi. In the circumstances, the learned trial Judge was not justified in placing reliance on 35 Cr. L J 1335 which proceeded on "utter breaking down" of the evidence of alibi justifying an inference adverse to the accused. In fact, the view taken by the learned trial Judge, particularly misconstruing the non-production in defence by the appellants of H. C. Muhammad Nawaz and F. C. Nazar Muhammad who had arrested them as a circumstance against them creates an impression as if the onus of proving their innocence is shifted to the appellants instead of the prosecution establishing its case beyond reasonable doubt. In the circumstances of the case it would be unfair to say that the plea taken by the two appellants was demonstrably false. 17. It was contended by the learned Assistant Advocate --General on the other hand that the three eye-witnesses, namely, Sajawal complainant, his wife Sadori (P. W. 6) and his cousin Bokhairo (P. W. 7) being the inmates of the house were the only natural witnesses whose testimony was rightly believed by the learn--ed trial Judge corroborated as it were by the recovery of bloodstain--ed earth from the spot, the crime empties, the recovery of the Juti which fitted Ramzan appellant and the subsequent recoveries of the two guns one belonging to Ramzan and the other secured from Durro at the time of his arrest which according to the Ballistic Expert's report (sought to be proved by way of additional evidence) had been used in the commission of the offence. In support of this argument, reliance was placed on Nazir and others v. The State ( P L D 1962 S C 269 ) and Sardar Ali v. State ( PLD 1967 SC 217 ). In the first authority, while explaining the position earlier taken in Niaz v. State (P L D 1960 S C 386) their Lordships took the view that it could not be laid down as an inflexible rule that statement of an interested witness could never be accepted without corroboration. Again on the point of corroboration it was observed: "It is not necessary that there should be the word of an independent witness supporting the story put forward by an interested witness. Corroboration may be afforded by anything in the circumstances of a case which tend sufficiently to satisfy the mind of the Court that the witness has spoken the truth. What circumstances will be sufficient as corroboration it is not possible to lay down." The learned Assistant Advocate-General particularly emphasised the two corroborating circumstances mentioned by their Lordships, namely, the number of culprits being commensurate with the nature of the attack and the naming of the persons as culprits who could be expected to join that were forthcoming in the instant case. In the second authority, their Lordships considered the recovery of blood-stained articles from the place of beating of the deceased in the Ihata of the accused to be of sufficient corroborative force to establish the truth of the statements of the witnesses. 18. We have already tried to assess the probabilities of the case and discussed the points which tend to militate against the credibility of the eye-witnesses. This coupled with the evidence of alibi led by Arbab and Ramzan which even though approached with the utmost scepticism does not exclude the possibility of their having manoeuvred to get themselves arrested after having sent some hired assassins, would clearly show that the authorities relied upon by the learned Assistant Advocate-General cannot be pressed into service which proceed on distinguishable facts. Even in these cases their Lordships of the Supreme Court were careful to observe that no hard or fast rule could be laid down as to the probative force of a certain piece of corroborative evidence. In fact both in regard to the reliability of an interested witness as also on the acceptance of a particular circumstance as furnishing corroboration, and the sufficiency or otherwise of their probative force are matters which depend on the circumstances of each case which taken together give rise to an over-all picture clear and convincing or blurred and doubtful, as the case may be In the instant case, even if it is assumed that the Juti subsequently recovered from the spot escaped the notice of the complainant and as such was not mentioned in the first information report and was later found to have fitted on the foot of Ramzan appellant, it could hardly be of any corroborative value inasmuch as the equality of the size and dimensions of the foot of one person with several others is not only possible but quite probable being a matter of common day observation. It is noteworthy that the prosecution did not examine any witness on the point of ownership of Juti and merely because it fitted Ramzan would scarcely prove that it belonged to him g as was worn by him. This is a question of fact and has to be proved by intrinsic evidence like any other fact. As regards the recovery of the licensed gun of Arbab appellant produced by his relation Jumman on 7th October 1966, it could be argued that the same had possibly been given by Arbab himself to a assassin hired by him for avenging the murder of his father. In so far as the recovery of the gun from the possession of Durro appellant at the time of his arrest is concerned, we have no hesitation in saying that this evidence proceeding on the testimony of Maula Bakhsh S. I. (P. W. 1) is far from convincing. According to the latter, Durro was arrested on the 28th of October 1966 "from Jhatpat Road at 5 a. m." on the basis of a secret information received at the police station at 3-30 a.m, when he was accompanied by A. S. I. Ali Nawaz (P. W. 9) and H. C. Mir Beg. Significantly enough the mashirnama prepared in this regard (Exh. 5) is not attested by any F member of the public and as such it does not appear to be safe to plate implicit reliance on its genuineness. The suggestion though denied was specifically put to the Sub-Inspector in cross-examination that Durro appellant had been produced before him by Haji Ahmad Khan Jamali on 26th of October 3 966, at 4-00 p. m., at Police Station Sadar, Jacobabad and that the gun and the cartridges were foisted on him. It may be observed that this gun was an unlicensed arm. Haji Ahmad Khan Jamali who was admitted by S. I. Maula Bakhsh to be a highly educated zamindar appeared as D. W. 2 to depose that it was he who had produced Durro at the police station. This gentleman who is a zamindar and Chairnnan of the Union Committee Idgah Taluka Jacobabad was not at all cross-examined by the learned Public Prosecutor in order to shake his credit. Furthermore, as pointed out already the gum was never sealed and there is no evidence that the crime empties and guns were not tampered with at any stage till their delivery at the Forensic Science Laboratory. Therefore, in the peculiar circumstances of the case, the recovery of Juri Exh. 91 and gun are entirely unavailing as corroborative evidence in the case. 19. Before disposing of the case of Durro, we may also refer to his alleged abscondence which has been construed by the learned trial Judge as a corroborative circumstance against him. It was never the prosecution's case that efforts had been made by the Investigating Officer to arrest this appellant or that he ha d absconded or that some coercive measures for his arrest lead been resorted to. In fact, a reference to his absconding is conspicuous by its absence in the statements of the two Investigating Officers, namely, S. I. Maula Bakhsh (P. W. 1) and A. S. I. Ali Nawaz (P. W. 9). It was only in answer to a question put by the defence that the former stated that before 28th of October 1966, he had tried to find accused Durro. No inference of abscondence can be raised on the basis of this bare observation. 20. Having considered all the pros and cons of the case, we are clearly of the view that the guilt of the four appellants is not established beyond reasonable doubt. In consequence, giving the appellants the benefit of doubt, we allow the appeal, set aside their convictions and sentences. They are acquitted of all the charges and should be set at liberty if not required in any other case. In the circumstances we decline to confirm the sentence of death awarded to Durro and Arbab appellants. The fine if paid shall be refunded to them. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-14 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem