EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark Ashwani Kumar Jain vs CEGAT, New Delhi Civil Misc Writ Petition No. 2172 of 2002 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: Ashwani Kumar Jain Respondant: CEGAT, New Delhi Result: Writ Petition Dismissed Judgment Date: 2002-07-31 Court: Allahabad High Court Judges: Ashok Bhushan S. K. Sen Citations Advocates Statutes 2005 P.C.T.L.R. 1043 Judgment ORDER Heard Pramod Kumar Jain, Advocate appearing for the petitioners and Anoop Kumar Srivastava, Additional Standing Counsel appearing for the respondents. 2. By this writ petition, the petitioner has challenged the order dated 22.4.2002 passed by Customs Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal by which the application for waiver for pre-deposit has been decided. 3. The counsel for the petitioners has stated that an amount of penalty imposed by the order dated 29.10.20Q1 is more than 4.5 Crores. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, the Tribunal has directed deposit of sum of only Rs. 20,00,000/- from the petitioner No. 1 and Rs. 5,00,000/- from petitioner No. 2. On the deposit of the above-mentioned amount, the deposit of the remaining amount of duty and penalty has been waived for hearing of the appeal. We are satisfied that Tribunal has considered the facts and circumstances and has allowed the prayer of waiver of the deposit partly. 4. We do not find any error in the order dated , 22.4.2002. No interference is called with the impugned order in the present writ petition. 5: There is no merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Allahabad High Court Judge(s): Ashok Bhushan, S. K. Sen Title: Ashwani Kumar Jain vs CEGAT, New Delhi Case No.: Civil Misc Writ Petition No. 2172 of 2002 Date of Judgment: 2002-07-31 Reported As: 2005 P.C.T.L.R. 1043 Result: Writ Petition Dismissed Judgment ORDER Heard Pramod Kumar Jain, Advocate appearing for the petitioners and Anoop Kumar Srivastava, Additional Standing Counsel appearing for the respondents. 2. By this writ petition, the petitioner has challenged the order dated 22.4.2002 passed by Customs Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal by which the application for waiver for pre-deposit has been decided. 3. The counsel for the petitioners has stated that an amount of penalty imposed by the order dated 29.10.20Q1 is more than 4.5 Crores. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, the Tribunal has directed deposit of sum of only Rs. 20,00,000/- from the petitioner No. 1 and Rs. 5,00,000/- from petitioner No. 2. On the deposit of the above-mentioned amount, the deposit of the remaining amount of duty and penalty has been waived for hearing of the appeal. We are satisfied that Tribunal has considered the facts and circumstances and has allowed the prayer of waiver of the deposit partly. 4. We do not find any error in the order dated , 22.4.2002. No interference is called with the impugned order in the present writ petition. 5: There is no merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem