EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark ASIF ALI BUTT vs PROVINCE OF PUNJAB and others Civil Petition No.574-L of 2001 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: ASIF ALI BUTT Respondant: PROVINCE OF PUNJAB and others Result: Petition dismissed Judgment Date: 2005-10-03 Court: Supreme Court of Pakistan Judges: Falak Sher Citations Advocates Statutes 2007 P L C (C.S.) 220 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' SYED JAMSHED ALI, J.--- The petitioner seeks leave to appeal against the order dated 1-1-2001 of the learned Punjab Service Tribunal whereby his appeal was dismissed. The brief facts of the case are noted hereunder. 2. The petitioner was working as Junior Clerk in the Pakistan Railways Police when the Pakistan Railways Police was under the Federal Government. The petitioner along with the other staff, working in the Railways Police Department was transferred to the Railways Police. Act, 1977, created a separate functional unit of Railways Police (sic). The petitioner was confirmed on 1-3-1977 in the Pakistan Railways Police, promoted as Senior Clerk in 1980 and granted selection grade (BS-9) in the year 1987. His lien in the Punjab Police was suspended by I.-G.P. On 13-1-1981. On 21-9-1987, the petitioner was reverted to Punjab Police as Junior Clerk on his request and with his written consent. He was promoted as Senior Clerk on 26-4-1988 in the Punjab Police. He filed a representation against suspension of his lien in the Punjab Police and prayed for restoration of his original seniority. His representation was rejected on 16-12-1999 and his appeal was dismissed by learned Punjab Service Tribunal. 3. The petitioner has appeared in person and has contended that his lien could not have been suspended even with his consent and, therefore, on transfer to the Punjab Police he was entitled to promotion as Senior Clerk on the date of promotion of his juniors i.e. Respondents Nos.2 and 3. 4. The submissions have been considered. The petitioner was transferred to the Punjab Police on his own request and with his written consent, was confirmed in the Railways Police as Junior Clerk w,e,f, 1-3-1977. Confirmation in another post entails termination of lien on the post previously held. The Tribunal also took notice of the fact that the petitioner approached the departmental ' authority with a representation against suspension of lien after more than 10 years. No substantial question of law of public importance has been raised to warrant interference. Dismissed. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Supreme Court of Pakistan Judge(s): Falak Sher Title: ASIF ALI BUTT vs PROVINCE OF PUNJAB and others Case No.: Civil Petition No.574-L of 2001 Date of Judgment: 2005-10-03 Reported As: 2007 P L C (C.S.) 220 Result: Petition dismissed Judgment ORDER ' SYED JAMSHED ALI, J.--- The petitioner seeks leave to appeal against the order dated 1-1-2001 of the learned Punjab Service Tribunal whereby his appeal was dismissed. The brief facts of the case are noted hereunder. 2. The petitioner was working as Junior Clerk in the Pakistan Railways Police when the Pakistan Railways Police was under the Federal Government. The petitioner along with the other staff, working in the Railways Police Department was transferred to the Railways Police. Act, 1977, created a separate functional unit of Railways Police (sic). The petitioner was confirmed on 1-3-1977 in the Pakistan Railways Police, promoted as Senior Clerk in 1980 and granted selection grade (BS-9) in the year 1987. His lien in the Punjab Police was suspended by I.-G.P. On 13-1-1981. On 21-9-1987, the petitioner was reverted to Punjab Police as Junior Clerk on his request and with his written consent. He was promoted as Senior Clerk on 26-4-1988 in the Punjab Police. He filed a representation against suspension of his lien in the Punjab Police and prayed for restoration of his original seniority. His representation was rejected on 16-12-1999 and his appeal was dismissed by learned Punjab Service Tribunal. 3. The petitioner has appeared in person and has contended that his lien could not have been suspended even with his consent and, therefore, on transfer to the Punjab Police he was entitled to promotion as Senior Clerk on the date of promotion of his juniors i.e. Respondents Nos.2 and 3. 4. The submissions have been considered. The petitioner was transferred to the Punjab Police on his own request and with his written consent, was confirmed in the Railways Police as Junior Clerk w,e,f, 1-3-1977. Confirmation in another post entails termination of lien on the post previously held. The Tribunal also took notice of the fact that the petitioner approached the departmental ' authority with a representation against suspension of lien after more than 10 years. No substantial question of law of public importance has been raised to warrant interference. Dismissed. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-14 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem