EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark ATTA MUHAMMAD and others vs Mst. AZIZ and others R.O.R. No,3690 of 1987 Judgment Details Cited by 2 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: ATTA MUHAMMAD and others Respondant: Mst. AZIZ and others Result: Petition dismissed Judgment Date: 1988-10-19 Court: Board of Revenue, Punjab Judges: Syed Sarfraz Hussain Citations Advocates Statutes P L D 1989 Revenue 14 Subsequent References Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' This is a revision petition filed under section 13 of the Consolidation of Holdings Ordinance, 1960 against the order dated 10-8-1987 of the Additional Commissioner (Cons.), Dera Ghazi Khan, whereby appeal filed by the respondents was accepted. 2. I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioners and have gone through the record of the case. It is a well-settled matter that during consolidation a joint Khata can be partitioned only with the consent in writing of all the shareholders. In this case the respondents did oppose the separation of their Khata, therefore, the learned Additional Commissioner (Cons.) had rightly ordered for rejoining the Khata of the parties which was partitioned by the Collector (Cons.) without any justification. The impugned order is in conformity with the provisions of law. The revision petition being devoid of force is dismissed in limine. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue, Punjab Judge(s): Syed Sarfraz Hussain Title: ATTA MUHAMMAD and others vs Mst. AZIZ and others Case No.: R.O.R. No,3690 of 1987 Date of Judgment: 1988-10-19 Reported As: P L D 1989 Revenue 14 Result: Petition dismissed Judgment ORDER ' This is a revision petition filed under section 13 of the Consolidation of Holdings Ordinance, 1960 against the order dated 10-8-1987 of the Additional Commissioner (Cons.), Dera Ghazi Khan, whereby appeal filed by the respondents was accepted. 2. I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioners and have gone through the record of the case. It is a well-settled matter that during consolidation a joint Khata can be partitioned only with the consent in writing of all the shareholders. In this case the respondents did oppose the separation of their Khata, therefore, the learned Additional Commissioner (Cons.) had rightly ordered for rejoining the Khata of the parties which was partitioned by the Collector (Cons.) without any justification. The impugned order is in conformity with the provisions of law. The revision petition being devoid of force is dismissed in limine. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem