EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark AVADESH KUMAR UPADHYAY vs COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX Income Tax Application No, 225 of 1991, Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: AVADESH KUMAR UPADHYAY Respondant: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX Result: Order accordingly Judgment Date: 1991-10-10 Court: Allahabad High Court Judges: A. N. Verrna R. K. Gulati Citations Advocates Statutes 1993 P T D 823(1) Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT Having heard learned counsel for the assessee and learned counsel representing the Commissioner of Income-tax, we are of the opinion that the following question of law does arise out of the order of the Tribunal: "Whether, on the facts and circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was right in law in holding that the cash credit in the name of Sint. Memo Deyi amounting to Rs,21,000 remained unexplained?" ' We, accordingly, direct the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal to draw up a statement of the case and refer the above question for our opinion. No orders as to costs. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Allahabad High Court Judge(s): A. N. Verrna, R. K. Gulati Title: AVADESH KUMAR UPADHYAY vs COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX Case No.: Income Tax Application No, 225 of 1991, Date of Judgment: 1991-10-10 Reported As: 1993 P T D 823(1) Result: Order accordingly Judgment JUDGMENT Having heard learned counsel for the assessee and learned counsel representing the Commissioner of Income-tax, we are of the opinion that the following question of law does arise out of the order of the Tribunal: "Whether, on the facts and circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was right in law in holding that the cash credit in the name of Sint. Memo Deyi amounting to Rs,21,000 remained unexplained?" ' We, accordingly, direct the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal to draw up a statement of the case and refer the above question for our opinion. No orders as to costs. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem