EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark AYYAZ ANJUM vs GOVERNMENT OF PUNJAB, HOUSING AND PHYSICIAL PLANNING DEPARTMENT through Secretary and others Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No, 1232-L of 1996 Writ Petition No, 3617 of 1996 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 3 Appeallant: AYYAZ ANJUM Respondant: GOVERNMENT OF PUNJAB, HOUSING AND PHYSICIAL PLANNING DEPARTMENT through Secretary and others Result: Case remanded Judgment Date: 1997-04-24 Court: Supreme Court of Pakistan Judges: Fazal Karim Muhammad Ilyas Saad Saood Jan Author Citations Advocates Statutes 1997 P L C (C.S.) 123 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' SAAD SAOOD JAN, J.---The petitioner and Muhammad Younis Chohan, respondent No, 3, are serving in the Public Health Engineering Department. There have been a number of orders relating to their inter se transfers. Both accused the other of invoking political influence in getting posting of his own choice at the cost of the other. Respondent No, 3 filed a Constitutional petition in the High Court to call in question the legality of the order dated 13-3-1996 which was the latest in the series. The High Court called for the record from the department and in the meanwhile suspended the impugned order. The petitioner seeks leave to appeal from this Court. 2. Clearly, the matters relating to the posting and transfer of a civil servant relate to the terms and conditions of his service. Disputes about these matters fall within the exclusive jurisdiction of the appropriate Service Tribunal. The jurisdiction of High Court is barred in these matters by the express provisions of Article 212(2) of the Constitution. We are therefore unable to support the interim order made by it in this case. Accordingly, we convert this petition into appeal and set aside the said order. The High Court should first determine the question of its jurisdiction before making any interim order in this case. This appeal is disposed of accordingly. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Supreme Court of Pakistan Judge(s): Fazal Karim, Muhammad Ilyas, Saad Saood Jan Title: AYYAZ ANJUM vs GOVERNMENT OF PUNJAB, HOUSING AND PHYSICIAL PLANNING DEPARTMENT through Secretary and others Case No.: Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No, 1232-L of 1996 Writ Petition No, 3617 of 1996 Date of Judgment: 1997-04-24 Reported As: 1997 P L C (C.S.) 123 Result: Case remanded Judgment ORDER ' SAAD SAOOD JAN, J.---The petitioner and Muhammad Younis Chohan, respondent No, 3, are serving in the Public Health Engineering Department. There have been a number of orders relating to their inter se transfers. Both accused the other of invoking political influence in getting posting of his own choice at the cost of the other. Respondent No, 3 filed a Constitutional petition in the High Court to call in question the legality of the order dated 13-3-1996 which was the latest in the series. The High Court called for the record from the department and in the meanwhile suspended the impugned order. The petitioner seeks leave to appeal from this Court. 2. Clearly, the matters relating to the posting and transfer of a civil servant relate to the terms and conditions of his service. Disputes about these matters fall within the exclusive jurisdiction of the appropriate Service Tribunal. The jurisdiction of High Court is barred in these matters by the express provisions of Article 212(2) of the Constitution. We are therefore unable to support the interim order made by it in this case. Accordingly, we convert this petition into appeal and set aside the said order. The High Court should first determine the question of its jurisdiction before making any interim order in this case. This appeal is disposed of accordingly. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-14 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem