EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark AZIZULLAH KHAN ETC. vs Haji ABDUL JALIL AND ANOTHER Revision Petitions Nos. 106 and 107, Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 1 Coram 1 Appeallant: AZIZULLAH KHAN ETC. Respondant: Haji ABDUL JALIL AND ANOTHER Result: Petition dismissed Judgment Date: 1978-04-23 Court: Board of Revenue, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Judges: Zafar Ali Khan Citations Advocates Statutes P L D 1980 Rev. 4 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' Mian Muhammad Younas Shah, Advocate, Peshawar, for petitioner is present and has been heard in these two revision petitions involving a common point in issue between the same parties. These two revision petitions have arisen out of an order of the Assistant Collector 1st ,Grade dated 12-11-1973 by which the application of the petitioner for extension of period for payment of court-fee has been rejected and this decision has been upheld in an appeal an further appeal by the Collector and Additional Commissioner. The learned counsel for the petitioner has challenged the orders of the lower Courts on the ground that a Court has got the jurisdiction to extend time for payment of court-fee even after the period has expired. Bu he could not furnish any convincing arguments nor could he produce any case-law in support of his contention. Section 148 of the Civil Procedure Code gives the Court ample power to exercise its discretion in extending the time limit for making good the deficiency in payment of court-fee. But once this discretion is exercised, and the order is announced, this Court ceases to have further jurisdiction. In this case the learned Additional Commissioner has rightly concluded that after the expiry of one month's time allowed by the Court, it had become "functus officio" and was not at all competent to give extension in time any longer. In this respect he has placed reliance on a solid judgment of the High Court as contained in P L D 1956 Dacca 280 . ' It is the fault of the petitioner in not availing of the one month's time limit fixed for the payment of the court-fee arrears and since he has failed to do so without sufficient cause, he must suffer. In view of these circumstances the concurrent findings, of the lower Courts are upheld. The revision petition is, therefore, rejected in limine. in limine. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Judge(s): Zafar Ali Khan Title: AZIZULLAH KHAN ETC. vs Haji ABDUL JALIL AND ANOTHER Case No.: Revision Petitions Nos. 106 and 107, Date of Judgment: 1978-04-23 Reported As: P L D 1980 Rev. 4 Result: Petition dismissed Judgment ORDER ' Mian Muhammad Younas Shah, Advocate, Peshawar, for petitioner is present and has been heard in these two revision petitions involving a common point in issue between the same parties. These two revision petitions have arisen out of an order of the Assistant Collector 1st ,Grade dated 12-11-1973 by which the application of the petitioner for extension of period for payment of court-fee has been rejected and this decision has been upheld in an appeal an further appeal by the Collector and Additional Commissioner. The learned counsel for the petitioner has challenged the orders of the lower Courts on the ground that a Court has got the jurisdiction to extend time for payment of court-fee even after the period has expired. Bu he could not furnish any convincing arguments nor could he produce any case-law in support of his contention. Section 148 of the Civil Procedure Code gives the Court ample power to exercise its discretion in extending the time limit for making good the deficiency in payment of court-fee. But once this discretion is exercised, and the order is announced, this Court ceases to have further jurisdiction. In this case the learned Additional Commissioner has rightly concluded that after the expiry of one month's time allowed by the Court, it had become "functus officio" and was not at all competent to give extension in time any longer. In this respect he has placed reliance on a solid judgment of the High Court as contained in P L D 1956 Dacca 280 . ' It is the fault of the petitioner in not availing of the one month's time limit fixed for the payment of the court-fee arrears and since he has failed to do so without sufficient cause, he must suffer. In view of these circumstances the concurrent findings, of the lower Courts are upheld. The revision petition is, therefore, rejected in limine. in limine. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem