EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark CHAIRMAN EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD, GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN, LAHORE and another vs PRESIDENT OF QUETTA HINDU PUNCHAYAT and another Civil Misc. Appin. Nos, 220 & 221 of 2009, in C.R. No, 176 of 2005 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 5 Coram 1 Appeallant: CHAIRMAN EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD, GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN, LAHORE and another Respondant: PRESIDENT OF QUETTA HINDU PUNCHAYAT and another Result: Applications dismissed Judgment Date: 2009-07-20 Court: Balochistan High Court Judges: Ahmed Khan Lashari Citations Advocates Statutes PLJ 2010 Quetta 10 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT The applicants have filed Civil Misc: Applications No,220 & 221 of 2009, wherein prayer has been made for recalling of order dated 23.05.2008 and restoration of petition. dismissed in default and for non-prosecution as well as condonation of the delay in filing application for restoration of the petition. 2. Respondents President, Hiadu Panchayat, Quetta and Dr. Tara Chand, the then Member, Provincial Assembly, Balochistan, Quetta, filed a "suit for declaration and injunction against applicants Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board, Government of Pakistan, Lahore and Assistant Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property Board, Quetta, with the averments that xArya Samaj Mandir' bearing Municipal No, 2-37/10-A, situated at Masjid Road, Quetta, falling under Khasra No, 4320, measuring 9145 sq.ft. consisting of four rooms with prayer halls, is in the use of Panchayat. The property was declared to be of religious purposes by the Evacuee Department and had no nexus with the Evacuee Trust Board, but still the applicants were interfering in the property, compelling the respondents to institute the suit. The suit was contested and the trial Court, after framing issues and recording evidence, vide judgment dated 05-04-2004 dismissed the suit, against which appeal was filed and the Additional District Judge-V, Quetta vide judgment dated 26-02-2005 allowed the appeal and the respondents' suit was decreed. The applicants, being dissatisfied with the judgement/decree, filed Civil Revision Petition before this Court, which was admitted for regular hearing on 29-05-2005. Subsequently, due to non-appearance of the applicants as well as their counsel, petition was dismissed in default and for non-prosecution on 23-05-2008, hence, these applications. 3. M/s. Kamran Murtaza and Abid Mehmood, learned counsel for applicants, contended that the petition was dismissed in default and for non-prosecution on account of absence of Mr. Abid Mehmood, Advocate, who due to illness of his brother had left for Lahore on 17.05.2008, where his brother expired on 23-05-2008, therefore, the absence of the counsel was neither deliberate, nor intentional. It was argued that though application has been filed with a delay, but sufficient cause has been disclosed and this Court has the powers to condone the delay. It was also contended that though specific provision has not been provided for filing application for restoration of the petition dismissed in default, still there is application for condonation of the delay with reasonable ground. They, in support of their arguments referred the judgements-reported in 1971 SCMR 740 , PLD 1997 Peshawar 55 and 2004 SCMR 400 . 4. Mr. Sundar Dass, learned counsel for Respondent No, 1, submitted that the application has been filed almost after a lapse of about one year, without disclosing any sufficient cause or reason, thus applications be dismissed. He, in support of his arguments referred the judgments-reported in 2004 SCMR pages 387 -615 and PLJ 1994 Lahore 542. 5. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the reported judgments cited as well as record. The petition was dismissed in default and for non-prosecution on 23-05-2008, while the applications, seeking restoration of the petition as well as condonation of the delay, have been filed on 04-03-2009. The plea raised in the applications is that the counsel (Mr. Abid Mehmood, Advocate) on account of sudden illness of his brother had left for Lahore on 17.05.2008, where his brother expired on 23-05-2008, but the counsel has failed t6 explain the period from 24-05-2008 to 04-03-2009 (more than nine months) for non-approaching the Court or for non-appearance of the applicants in the matter. The applicants as well as their counsel slept over and filed the applications with the delay, without disclosing the reasons beyond their control. 6. The counsel for applicants referred the judgment-reported in PLD 1997 Peshawar 55 , wherein the suit pending before the trial Court was dismissed in default and for non-prosecution, against which an appeal was filed, whereby the suit was restored on payment of Rs,5000/- as cost and in civil revision petition, the order was not interfered with. The other judgments-reported in 1971 SCMR 740 and 2004 SCMR 400 , are also not on the point involved in the matter. 7. On the other hand, counsel for Respondent No, 1 stressed that the applicants have failed to point out any sufficient cause or reason so that the delay occurred in filing the application be condoned. The judgment, relied upon by the counsel, reported in 2004 SCMR 615 , is clear on the point; the relevant portion thereof is reproduced herein below: "It was the case of the petitioners before the High Court that their learned counsel was present before the Bench on 30.09.1999 and that the said learned counsel left the Court-room to appear before another learned Bench and it was on his return that he found that the said revision petition had been dismissed for non-prosecution. If this was so, then there is no explanation as to what had taken the petitioners almost four months to make an application for restoration of the said revision petition. In these circumstances we find' no reason to interfere with the discretion exercised by the High Court in passing the impugned order." 8. The counsel for applicants submitted that there is no specific provision of law for filing application, Seeking restoration of Civil revision petition, thus, the Court, in exercise of inherent jurisdiction conferred under Section 115 CPC, may restore the petition and that Article 181 of the Limitation Act would apply in the case, which provides a period of three years for filing of applications for restoration of the petitions, dismissed in default. The Hon'ble Supreme Court, while dealing with the point in hand, in the case of Said Ali vs. Safdar Ali and others reported in 2004 SCMR 387 has held that: "Contention of petitioner that no period of limitation was prescribed for restoration of civil revision and thus, he could move application within three years, was not accepted being not in consonance with letter and spirit of law." It is set principle of law and the superior 'Courts time and again held that the person, seeking condonation of delay, must explain delay of each and every day to the satisfaction of the Court and should also establish that the delay has been caused due to reason beyond his control. When the delay in filing application is seemingly due to mere negligence and careless of the applicant, who failed to pursue his case with due diligence, then he is not entitled to any indulgence by the Court. What has been discussed hereinabove, the applications, being devoid of any merit, are dismissed. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Balochistan High Court Judge(s): Ahmed Khan Lashari Title: CHAIRMAN EVACUEE TRUST PROPERTY BOARD, GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN, LAHORE and another vs PRESIDENT OF QUETTA HINDU PUNCHAYAT and another Case No.: Civil Misc. Appin. Nos, 220 & 221 of 2009, in C.R. No, 176 of 2005 Date of Judgment: 2009-07-20 Reported As: PLJ 2010 Quetta 10 Result: Applications dismissed Judgment JUDGMENT The applicants have filed Civil Misc: Applications No,220 & 221 of 2009, wherein prayer has been made for recalling of order dated 23.05.2008 and restoration of petition. dismissed in default and for non-prosecution as well as condonation of the delay in filing application for restoration of the petition. 2. Respondents President, Hiadu Panchayat, Quetta and Dr. Tara Chand, the then Member, Provincial Assembly, Balochistan, Quetta, filed a "suit for declaration and injunction against applicants Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board, Government of Pakistan, Lahore and Assistant Administrator, Evacuee Trust Property Board, Quetta, with the averments that xArya Samaj Mandir' bearing Municipal No, 2-37/10-A, situated at Masjid Road, Quetta, falling under Khasra No, 4320, measuring 9145 sq.ft. consisting of four rooms with prayer halls, is in the use of Panchayat. The property was declared to be of religious purposes by the Evacuee Department and had no nexus with the Evacuee Trust Board, but still the applicants were interfering in the property, compelling the respondents to institute the suit. The suit was contested and the trial Court, after framing issues and recording evidence, vide judgment dated 05-04-2004 dismissed the suit, against which appeal was filed and the Additional District Judge-V, Quetta vide judgment dated 26-02-2005 allowed the appeal and the respondents' suit was decreed. The applicants, being dissatisfied with the judgement/decree, filed Civil Revision Petition before this Court, which was admitted for regular hearing on 29-05-2005. Subsequently, due to non-appearance of the applicants as well as their counsel, petition was dismissed in default and for non-prosecution on 23-05-2008, hence, these applications. 3. M/s. Kamran Murtaza and Abid Mehmood, learned counsel for applicants, contended that the petition was dismissed in default and for non-prosecution on account of absence of Mr. Abid Mehmood, Advocate, who due to illness of his brother had left for Lahore on 17.05.2008, where his brother expired on 23-05-2008, therefore, the absence of the counsel was neither deliberate, nor intentional. It was argued that though application has been filed with a delay, but sufficient cause has been disclosed and this Court has the powers to condone the delay. It was also contended that though specific provision has not been provided for filing application for restoration of the petition dismissed in default, still there is application for condonation of the delay with reasonable ground. They, in support of their arguments referred the judgements-reported in 1971 SCMR 740 , PLD 1997 Peshawar 55 and 2004 SCMR 400 . 4. Mr. Sundar Dass, learned counsel for Respondent No, 1, submitted that the application has been filed almost after a lapse of about one year, without disclosing any sufficient cause or reason, thus applications be dismissed. He, in support of his arguments referred the judgments-reported in 2004 SCMR pages 387 -615 and PLJ 1994 Lahore 542. 5. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the reported judgments cited as well as record. The petition was dismissed in default and for non-prosecution on 23-05-2008, while the applications, seeking restoration of the petition as well as condonation of the delay, have been filed on 04-03-2009. The plea raised in the applications is that the counsel (Mr. Abid Mehmood, Advocate) on account of sudden illness of his brother had left for Lahore on 17.05.2008, where his brother expired on 23-05-2008, but the counsel has failed t6 explain the period from 24-05-2008 to 04-03-2009 (more than nine months) for non-approaching the Court or for non-appearance of the applicants in the matter. The applicants as well as their counsel slept over and filed the applications with the delay, without disclosing the reasons beyond their control. 6. The counsel for applicants referred the judgment-reported in PLD 1997 Peshawar 55 , wherein the suit pending before the trial Court was dismissed in default and for non-prosecution, against which an appeal was filed, whereby the suit was restored on payment of Rs,5000/- as cost and in civil revision petition, the order was not interfered with. The other judgments-reported in 1971 SCMR 740 and 2004 SCMR 400 , are also not on the point involved in the matter. 7. On the other hand, counsel for Respondent No, 1 stressed that the applicants have failed to point out any sufficient cause or reason so that the delay occurred in filing the application be condoned. The judgment, relied upon by the counsel, reported in 2004 SCMR 615 , is clear on the point; the relevant portion thereof is reproduced herein below: "It was the case of the petitioners before the High Court that their learned counsel was present before the Bench on 30.09.1999 and that the said learned counsel left the Court-room to appear before another learned Bench and it was on his return that he found that the said revision petition had been dismissed for non-prosecution. If this was so, then there is no explanation as to what had taken the petitioners almost four months to make an application for restoration of the said revision petition. In these circumstances we find' no reason to interfere with the discretion exercised by the High Court in passing the impugned order." 8. The counsel for applicants submitted that there is no specific provision of law for filing application, Seeking restoration of Civil revision petition, thus, the Court, in exercise of inherent jurisdiction conferred under Section 115 CPC, may restore the petition and that Article 181 of the Limitation Act would apply in the case, which provides a period of three years for filing of applications for restoration of the petitions, dismissed in default. The Hon'ble Supreme Court, while dealing with the point in hand, in the case of Said Ali vs. Safdar Ali and others reported in 2004 SCMR 387 has held that: "Contention of petitioner that no period of limitation was prescribed for restoration of civil revision and thus, he could move application within three years, was not accepted being not in consonance with letter and spirit of law." It is set principle of law and the superior 'Courts time and again held that the person, seeking condonation of delay, must explain delay of each and every day to the satisfaction of the Court and should also establish that the delay has been caused due to reason beyond his control. When the delay in filing application is seemingly due to mere negligence and careless of the applicant, who failed to pursue his case with due diligence, then he is not entitled to any indulgence by the Court. What has been discussed hereinabove, the applications, being devoid of any merit, are dismissed. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem