EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark CITY DRY FISH COMPANY vs COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX Case No.7 of 1992 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: CITY DRY FISH COMPANY Respondant: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX Result: Order accordingly Judgment Date: 2000-01-19 Court: Andhra Paradesh High Court Judges: B. Subhashan Reddy K. B. Siddappa Citations Advocates Statutes 2000 P T D 3543 Judgment JUDGMENT B. SUBHASHAN REDDY, J --This Income-tax case came up pursuant to the application made by the assessee under section 256(2) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, aggrieved by the action of the Tribunal in refusing to make a reference. The assessee was a partnership firm consisting originally of 18 partners. There was a change in the constitution of the firm, as six partners retired and in their place, six others were admitted. The business of the firm consisted of purchase and sale of dry fish on wholesale basis either self or commission basis. For the accounting year ending on September 30, 1979 (assessment year 1980-81), the firm filed a return on July 19, 1980, declaring the income of Rs.2,07,03, which was supported by the books of account. But, in a proceeding under section 132 and consequent to the search of the premises of the assessee, a note-book was recovered from the accountant of the firm, which disclosed a division of Rs.4,000 per share. The assessee had filed a revised return declaring the income of Rs.3,79,689, the details of which are as follows: Rs. Income arrived at the rate of Rs.4,000 per share (108 shares) 4,32,000 Less: The amount of reserve said to have been subjected to Tax 85,622 3,46,378 Add: Inadmissible expenditure 33,311 3,79,689 But, the Income-tax Officer added the sum of Rs.85,622 negativing the claim of the assessee that the same was the reserve of the previous year and was already subjected to tax. The matter ultimately landed in the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, Hyderabad Bench, which by its order, dated December 30, 1987, held that six partners who had retired had taken away their respective shares from the sum of Rs.85,622, which was in reserve. But, what was the amount, precisely, taken by the said partners was not available and, as spch, for the ascertainment of the same, the case was remitted back to the Income-tax Officer. The order of the Tribunal is to the effect that an amount of Rs. 85,622 pertained to the year' previous to the assessment year 1980-81 and was available as reserve and, as such, the order of the Income-tax Officer clubbing that amount of Rs.85,622 as the income for the assessment year 1980-81 stood set aside. As a necessary corollary, the levy of penalty on .The above component also stands set aside. We have decided these points straightaway instead of directing the case for reference and then ordering the reference, which will take another decade. To the above extent, the impugned order of the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal is set aside. Now, the concerned Income-tax-Officer shall decide the details of the profit-sharing ratio of the outgoing partners and then arrive at the balance and pass orders afresh. The income-tax case is disposed of accordingly. No costs. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Andhra Paradesh High Court Judge(s): B. Subhashan Reddy, K. B. Siddappa Title: CITY DRY FISH COMPANY vs COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX Case No.: Case No.7 of 1992 Date of Judgment: 2000-01-19 Reported As: 2000 P T D 3543 Result: Order accordingly Judgment JUDGMENT B. SUBHASHAN REDDY, J --This Income-tax case came up pursuant to the application made by the assessee under section 256(2) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, aggrieved by the action of the Tribunal in refusing to make a reference. The assessee was a partnership firm consisting originally of 18 partners. There was a change in the constitution of the firm, as six partners retired and in their place, six others were admitted. The business of the firm consisted of purchase and sale of dry fish on wholesale basis either self or commission basis. For the accounting year ending on September 30, 1979 (assessment year 1980-81), the firm filed a return on July 19, 1980, declaring the income of Rs.2,07,03, which was supported by the books of account. But, in a proceeding under section 132 and consequent to the search of the premises of the assessee, a note-book was recovered from the accountant of the firm, which disclosed a division of Rs.4,000 per share. The assessee had filed a revised return declaring the income of Rs.3,79,689, the details of which are as follows: Rs. Income arrived at the rate of Rs.4,000 per share (108 shares) 4,32,000 Less: The amount of reserve said to have been subjected to Tax 85,622 3,46,378 Add: Inadmissible expenditure 33,311 3,79,689 But, the Income-tax Officer added the sum of Rs.85,622 negativing the claim of the assessee that the same was the reserve of the previous year and was already subjected to tax. The matter ultimately landed in the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, Hyderabad Bench, which by its order, dated December 30, 1987, held that six partners who had retired had taken away their respective shares from the sum of Rs.85,622, which was in reserve. But, what was the amount, precisely, taken by the said partners was not available and, as spch, for the ascertainment of the same, the case was remitted back to the Income-tax Officer. The order of the Tribunal is to the effect that an amount of Rs. 85,622 pertained to the year' previous to the assessment year 1980-81 and was available as reserve and, as such, the order of the Income-tax Officer clubbing that amount of Rs.85,622 as the income for the assessment year 1980-81 stood set aside. As a necessary corollary, the levy of penalty on .The above component also stands set aside. We have decided these points straightaway instead of directing the case for reference and then ordering the reference, which will take another decade. To the above extent, the impugned order of the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal is set aside. Now, the concerned Income-tax-Officer shall decide the details of the profit-sharing ratio of the outgoing partners and then arrive at the balance and pass orders afresh. The income-tax case is disposed of accordingly. No costs. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem