EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark Co-Operation Department vs MUSHTAQ AHMAD (MUSHTAQ ALI) Case No. 537 of 1974 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 1 Coram 2 Appeallant: Co-Operation Department Respondant: MUSHTAQ AHMAD (MUSHTAQ ALI) Result: N/A Judgment Date: 1974-11-29 Court: Administrative Tribunal Judges: Ashfaq Ali Khan Khalid Farooq Akbar Citations Advocates Statutes 1975 P L C [C.S.T.] 90 Judgment ORDER Khalid Farooq Akbar (Member).—The main argument on behalf of the appellant is that the: — “Leamed Lower Court has erred in law in holding that the suit is maintainable and that ignoring the argument of the Government Pleader, the salary at that time was a bounty of State." The claim of pay under dispute is for the period 1-12-1961 to 12-2-1964. The original suit was instituted by the respondent in the Court of Administrative Civil Judge, Jhang on 9-12-1965 which was decreed in favour of the present respondent. The appeal of the present appellant i.e. the Province of West Pakistan was dismissed by the learned Additional District Judge, Jhang on 11-11-1967. We find that in the case of Pakistan v. Mrs. Issacs (1) the issue has been clearly decided by their Lordships. It has been observed in the said judgment as below: •‘Upon the view I have taken as regards the applicability of the doctrine of bounty to the case of salary already accrued due under the law prevailing at the time the respondent filed her suit, the respondent's appeal in the High Court was bound to succeed even (1) PLD 1970 SC 415 without invoking in aid the provisions of the Constitution of 1961. The general rule is that the rights of the parties to a suit Must be adjudicated upon on the basis Of the law prevailing at the date of the institution of the Suit.” • 3. We thus find that the salary was no longer a bounty of State in thei. relevant period as far as this case is concerned and we find no force in thep argument of the learned counsel. 4. On going through judgments of the lower Courts appended with the memorandum of appeal and having heard the learned counsel for the appellant we find no merit in this appeal which is dismissed in limine. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Administrative Tribunal Judge(s): Ashfaq Ali Khan, Khalid Farooq Akbar Title: Co-Operation Department vs MUSHTAQ AHMAD (MUSHTAQ ALI) Case No.: Case No. 537 of 1974 Date of Judgment: 1974-11-29 Reported As: 1975 P L C [C.S.T.] 90 Result: N/A Judgment ORDER Khalid Farooq Akbar (Member).—The main argument on behalf of the appellant is that the: — “Leamed Lower Court has erred in law in holding that the suit is maintainable and that ignoring the argument of the Government Pleader, the salary at that time was a bounty of State." The claim of pay under dispute is for the period 1-12-1961 to 12-2-1964. The original suit was instituted by the respondent in the Court of Administrative Civil Judge, Jhang on 9-12-1965 which was decreed in favour of the present respondent. The appeal of the present appellant i.e. the Province of West Pakistan was dismissed by the learned Additional District Judge, Jhang on 11-11-1967. We find that in the case of Pakistan v. Mrs. Issacs (1) the issue has been clearly decided by their Lordships. It has been observed in the said judgment as below: •‘Upon the view I have taken as regards the applicability of the doctrine of bounty to the case of salary already accrued due under the law prevailing at the time the respondent filed her suit, the respondent's appeal in the High Court was bound to succeed even (1) PLD 1970 SC 415 without invoking in aid the provisions of the Constitution of 1961. The general rule is that the rights of the parties to a suit Must be adjudicated upon on the basis Of the law prevailing at the date of the institution of the Suit.” • 3. We thus find that the salary was no longer a bounty of State in thei. relevant period as far as this case is concerned and we find no force in thep argument of the learned counsel. 4. On going through judgments of the lower Courts appended with the memorandum of appeal and having heard the learned counsel for the appellant we find no merit in this appeal which is dismissed in limine. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem