EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX vs Dr. ANWAR AHMAD SHAMSHI Income-tax Income-tax Reference No,200 of 1979 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX Respondant: Dr. ANWAR AHMAD SHAMSHI Income-tax Result: Reference answered Judgment Date: 1991-04-04 Court: Allahabad High Court Judges: B. P. Jeevan Reddy S. R. Singh Citations Advocates Statutes 1992 P T D 1550 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT ' B.P. JEEVAN REDDY, C.J.---Under section 256(2) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, the Tribunal has stated the following question: "Whether, on the facts and circumstances of the case, the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal was justified in knocking off the penalty solely on the ground that the income of the assessee had been made by estimate?" ' The assessee is a private medical practitioner of Bijnor. The assessment year concerned is 1970-71. He declared a total income of Rs,6,381. The Income Tax Officer, however, estimated the income at Rs,55,315. On appeal, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner reduced it to Rs,34,815. On further appeal, the Tribunal reduced it to Rs,16,815. ' Meanwhile, proceedings for levying penalty were initiated under section 271(1)(c) of the Income Tax Act. The Inspecting Assistant Commissioner found that this is a case to which the Explanation to section 271(1)(c) was attracted and that the assessee has failed to discharge the burden which lies upon him by virtue of the said explanation. Accordingly, he levied penalty in a sum of Rs,30,000. It may be noted that, by the date of the said order, the quantum appeal pending before the Tribunal was not disposed of. ' When the penalty appeal came before the Tribunal, the Tribunal was of the opinion 'that, in the matter of estimate of an assessee's income, it will not be reasonable to penalise an assessee only on the technical ground that the provisions of the explanation to section 271(1) are attracted'. ' But this is not the only ground for allowing the appeal. Furthermore, it is stated in the very same paragraph that: "In the instant case, there is nothing to suggest fraud or gross or wilful neglect on the part of the assessee." The question stated to this Court proceeds on the assumption that the penalty was deleted only on the ground that the income of the assessee had been made by estimate, but that, in our opinion is not wholly correct. It is not the sole ground, but one of the two grounds stated above. We agreed with learned standing counsel for the Revenue that the Tribunal was not right in practically laying down a rule of law that, in matters of estimate of income, it will not be reasonable to levy penalty. No such rule of law nor even a rule of practice can be recognised. It is not desirable to lay down such a proposition which binds the discretion of the authorities. But since this is not the only ground for deleting the penalty and since the other ground is a valid and relevant ground, we are not inclined to disturb the finding of the Tribunal that no penalty is leviable in this case. ' In the above circumstances, we decline to answer the question referred because it proceeds on the factual assumption which is not found to be correct. However, the Tribunal may note the observations made hereinbefore. The reference is answered accordingly. ' There shall be no order as to costs. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Allahabad High Court Judge(s): B. P. Jeevan Reddy, S. R. Singh Title: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX vs Dr. ANWAR AHMAD SHAMSHI Income-tax Case No.: Income-tax Reference No,200 of 1979 Date of Judgment: 1991-04-04 Reported As: 1992 P T D 1550 Result: Reference answered Judgment JUDGMENT ' B.P. JEEVAN REDDY, C.J.---Under section 256(2) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, the Tribunal has stated the following question: "Whether, on the facts and circumstances of the case, the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal was justified in knocking off the penalty solely on the ground that the income of the assessee had been made by estimate?" ' The assessee is a private medical practitioner of Bijnor. The assessment year concerned is 1970-71. He declared a total income of Rs,6,381. The Income Tax Officer, however, estimated the income at Rs,55,315. On appeal, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner reduced it to Rs,34,815. On further appeal, the Tribunal reduced it to Rs,16,815. ' Meanwhile, proceedings for levying penalty were initiated under section 271(1)(c) of the Income Tax Act. The Inspecting Assistant Commissioner found that this is a case to which the Explanation to section 271(1)(c) was attracted and that the assessee has failed to discharge the burden which lies upon him by virtue of the said explanation. Accordingly, he levied penalty in a sum of Rs,30,000. It may be noted that, by the date of the said order, the quantum appeal pending before the Tribunal was not disposed of. ' When the penalty appeal came before the Tribunal, the Tribunal was of the opinion 'that, in the matter of estimate of an assessee's income, it will not be reasonable to penalise an assessee only on the technical ground that the provisions of the explanation to section 271(1) are attracted'. ' But this is not the only ground for allowing the appeal. Furthermore, it is stated in the very same paragraph that: "In the instant case, there is nothing to suggest fraud or gross or wilful neglect on the part of the assessee." The question stated to this Court proceeds on the assumption that the penalty was deleted only on the ground that the income of the assessee had been made by estimate, but that, in our opinion is not wholly correct. It is not the sole ground, but one of the two grounds stated above. We agreed with learned standing counsel for the Revenue that the Tribunal was not right in practically laying down a rule of law that, in matters of estimate of income, it will not be reasonable to levy penalty. No such rule of law nor even a rule of practice can be recognised. It is not desirable to lay down such a proposition which binds the discretion of the authorities. But since this is not the only ground for deleting the penalty and since the other ground is a valid and relevant ground, we are not inclined to disturb the finding of the Tribunal that no penalty is leviable in this case. ' In the above circumstances, we decline to answer the question referred because it proceeds on the factual assumption which is not found to be correct. However, the Tribunal may note the observations made hereinbefore. The reference is answered accordingly. ' There shall be no order as to costs. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem