EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX vs S.G. TEJA SHAH CHIRANJIT LAL & CO R. A. No,264 of 1980 in I.T.A. No,1004 of 1978-79 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX Respondant: S.G. TEJA SHAH CHIRANJIT LAL & CO Result: Reference answered Judgment Date: 1996-12-11 Court: Allahabad High Court Judges: B. K. Sharma Om Prakash Citations Advocates Statutes 1998 P T D 1651 Judgment JUDGMENT ' At the instance of the Revenue, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi Bench "B", Delhi, referred the following question for the opinion of this Court: "Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal was correct in law holding that the income of the two periods could not be clubbed?" ' The reference relates to the assessment year 1977-78. A partnership firm was originally constituted by four partners; of them, one of the partners, namely, Shankar Dass, died on September 16, 1976. Thereafter, a new firm was constituted by inducting Smt Seelawati as a partner in place of the deceased partner along with the remaining existing partners. All these facts have been stated in the statement of the case. ' The question, therefore, arose whether on the death of Shankar Dass, the predecessor firm stood dissolved or that firm continued with a changed constitution. ' Sri Ashok Kumar, appearing for the Revenue, clearly states at the Bar that there was no clause in the partnership deed containing an agreement to the contrary that the partnership firm will not dissolve despite the death of a partner, Section 188 of the Income Tax Act, 1961, provides that where a firm carrying on a business or profession is succeeded by another firm, and the case is not one covered by section 187, separate assessments shall be made on the predecessor firm and the successor firm in accordance with the provisions of section 188. One of the partners having died on September 16, 1976, and there being no agreement to the contrary in the partnership deed that the partnership firm will not dissolve despite the death of a partner, we hold that the predecessor firm stood dissolved on the death of Shankar Dass and a new firm came into being which was constituted by the remaining partners and Smt. Seelawati, and newly introduced partner. It is a case of succession falling under section 188 of the Income Tax Act and not a case of change in the constitution of the firm, as envisaged in section 187. ' We, therefore, agree with the view taken by the Appellate Tribunal that the income of the two periods could not be clubbed. ' For the reasons the aforementioned question referred to this Court is answered in the affirmative, i,e,, against the Revenue and in favour of the assessee. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Allahabad High Court Judge(s): B. K. Sharma, Om Prakash Title: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX vs S.G. TEJA SHAH CHIRANJIT LAL & CO Case No.: R. A. No,264 of 1980 in I.T.A. No,1004 of 1978-79 Date of Judgment: 1996-12-11 Reported As: 1998 P T D 1651 Result: Reference answered Judgment JUDGMENT ' At the instance of the Revenue, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi Bench "B", Delhi, referred the following question for the opinion of this Court: "Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal was correct in law holding that the income of the two periods could not be clubbed?" ' The reference relates to the assessment year 1977-78. A partnership firm was originally constituted by four partners; of them, one of the partners, namely, Shankar Dass, died on September 16, 1976. Thereafter, a new firm was constituted by inducting Smt Seelawati as a partner in place of the deceased partner along with the remaining existing partners. All these facts have been stated in the statement of the case. ' The question, therefore, arose whether on the death of Shankar Dass, the predecessor firm stood dissolved or that firm continued with a changed constitution. ' Sri Ashok Kumar, appearing for the Revenue, clearly states at the Bar that there was no clause in the partnership deed containing an agreement to the contrary that the partnership firm will not dissolve despite the death of a partner, Section 188 of the Income Tax Act, 1961, provides that where a firm carrying on a business or profession is succeeded by another firm, and the case is not one covered by section 187, separate assessments shall be made on the predecessor firm and the successor firm in accordance with the provisions of section 188. One of the partners having died on September 16, 1976, and there being no agreement to the contrary in the partnership deed that the partnership firm will not dissolve despite the death of a partner, we hold that the predecessor firm stood dissolved on the death of Shankar Dass and a new firm came into being which was constituted by the remaining partners and Smt. Seelawati, and newly introduced partner. It is a case of succession falling under section 188 of the Income Tax Act and not a case of change in the constitution of the firm, as envisaged in section 187. ' We, therefore, agree with the view taken by the Appellate Tribunal that the income of the two periods could not be clubbed. ' For the reasons the aforementioned question referred to this Court is answered in the affirmative, i,e,, against the Revenue and in favour of the assessee. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem