EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX, PESHAWAR and others vs Messrs PAKISTAN ELECTRIC FITTINGS MANUFACTURING COMPANY LIMITED Civil Appeal No, 761 of 2000 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 3 Appeallant: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX, PESHAWAR and others Respondant: Messrs PAKISTAN ELECTRIC FITTINGS MANUFACTURING COMPANY LIMITED Result: Appeal dismissed Judgment Date: 2016-01-20 Court: Supreme Court of Pakistan Judges: Nasir-ul-Mulk Ijaz Ahmad Chaudhry Amir Hani Muslim Citations Advocates Statutes 2016 SCMR 1238 2016 P T D 1999 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT ' NASIR-UL-MULK, C.J.---Since this appeal is being decided on the preliminary objection raised on behalf of the respondent the questions of law involved need not be reiterated and addressed.. It is sufficient to state that the appellant, Commissioner of Income Tax, Karachi had filed petition for leave to appeal impugning the judgment of the High Court of Sindh in Income Tax Appeal No,158 of 1998 allowing the appeal of the respondent/assessee thereby setting aside the order of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and that of the lower forums. Leave to appeal was granted on 7.07.2000. The appeal was accepted on 27.04.2006; relevant paragraphs of the judgment which narrates facts briefly are reproduced:-- "2. Precisely stating the facts of the case are that the assessee/respondent declared his income in the annual return for the year 1997-98 in which income tax was levied in terms of section 2(12) of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1979 (hereinafter referred to as the "Ordinance"). The order of assessment was challenged by the respondent in appeal but could not succeed within the hierarchy of Income Tax Ordinance, as second appeal filed by respondent was dismissed on 5th May 1996. No Reference against and subjected the same to tax. The order of assessment was challenged by the respondent by way of first appeal, which failed, compelling him to approach Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the "Tribunal" ) by way of second appeal, which was also dismissed on 5th may 1996. No Reference against it was filed in terms of section 136 of the Ordinance. Subsequent thereto assessee filed an application for setting aside the judgment of the Tribunal under Rule 22 of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal Rules (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules") which was dismissed by the Tribunal vide order dated 20th May, 1997. Respondent instead of seeking remedy 'against this order before the proper forum moved another application for rectification of the order dated 5th May, 1996 in pursuance of section 156 of the Repealed Ordinance which was rejected on 14th March, 1998. Finding no redress before the Income Tax Authorities as well as the Tribunal respondent preferred Income Tax Appeal No,158 of 1998 before the learned High Court of Sindh. 3. The appellant objected to the maintainability of the appeal on the bar of limitation but the High Court vide impugned judgment converted the appeal into a writ petition and allowed the same. As such instant appeal has been filed." 2. The operative part of the judgment is incorporated in paragraphs 6 and 7 which read:-- '6. For the foregoing reasons we are of the opinion that the learned High Court should not have converted the time barred appeal into a constitution petition for the purpose of considering the case of the respondent on merits as the impugned judgment/order had attained finality much before filing of the appeal before the High Court. 7. Thus for the foregoing reasons the appeal is allowed and the impugned judgment of the High Court is set aside with no order as to costs." 3 A Review Petition (CRP No,310/2006) was filed which was allowed on the ground that contrary to the reference in the judgment under review that the High Court had converted time barred appeal into .Writ Petition and allowed the same the Court had actually decided the appeal and thus there was error apparent on the. Face of record. Consequently the judgment of 27.04.2006 was recalled and the appeal (C.A. No,761 /2000) was ordered to be deemed pending. The appeal therefore came up for hearing today. 4. The learned counsel for the respondent raised a preliminary objection that since under section 137 of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1979 (hereinafter to be referred to as the "Ordinance"), appeal lies to the Supreme Conn against the judgment of the High Court delivered under section 136 of the Ordinance, petition for leave to appeal filed by the appellants was not maintainable. The learned counsel for the appellant made attempts to justify filing of the petition contending that since the High Court could not have entertained the appeal, as only Reference maintainable against the order of the Tribunal, the judgment of the High Court cannot be treated as having been delivered in a Reference filed under section 136 of the Ordinance. This argument is without merits. Whether the High Court was possessed with powers or not to entertain die appeal under section 136 of the Ordinance the impugned order was passed under that provision of law and thus appeal under section 137 of the Ordinance and not petition for leave to appeal was maintainable. The time limitation for filing the appeal is 30 days while the petition for leave to appeal was filed on 06.03.2000 impugning the order of the High Court dated 03.01.2000. Therefore, it would be barred by time even if treated as an appeal. The appeal is, therefore, dismissed. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Supreme Court of Pakistan Judge(s): Nasir-ul-Mulk, Ijaz Ahmad Chaudhry, Amir Hani Muslim Title: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX, PESHAWAR and others vs Messrs PAKISTAN ELECTRIC FITTINGS MANUFACTURING COMPANY LIMITED Case No.: Civil Appeal No, 761 of 2000 Date of Judgment: 2016-01-20 Reported As: 2016 SCMR 1238, 2016 P T D 1999 Result: Appeal dismissed Judgment JUDGMENT ' NASIR-UL-MULK, C.J.---Since this appeal is being decided on the preliminary objection raised on behalf of the respondent the questions of law involved need not be reiterated and addressed.. It is sufficient to state that the appellant, Commissioner of Income Tax, Karachi had filed petition for leave to appeal impugning the judgment of the High Court of Sindh in Income Tax Appeal No,158 of 1998 allowing the appeal of the respondent/assessee thereby setting aside the order of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and that of the lower forums. Leave to appeal was granted on 7.07.2000. The appeal was accepted on 27.04.2006; relevant paragraphs of the judgment which narrates facts briefly are reproduced:-- "2. Precisely stating the facts of the case are that the assessee/respondent declared his income in the annual return for the year 1997-98 in which income tax was levied in terms of section 2(12) of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1979 (hereinafter referred to as the "Ordinance"). The order of assessment was challenged by the respondent in appeal but could not succeed within the hierarchy of Income Tax Ordinance, as second appeal filed by respondent was dismissed on 5th May 1996. No Reference against and subjected the same to tax. The order of assessment was challenged by the respondent by way of first appeal, which failed, compelling him to approach Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the "Tribunal" ) by way of second appeal, which was also dismissed on 5th may 1996. No Reference against it was filed in terms of section 136 of the Ordinance. Subsequent thereto assessee filed an application for setting aside the judgment of the Tribunal under Rule 22 of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal Rules (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules") which was dismissed by the Tribunal vide order dated 20th May, 1997. Respondent instead of seeking remedy 'against this order before the proper forum moved another application for rectification of the order dated 5th May, 1996 in pursuance of section 156 of the Repealed Ordinance which was rejected on 14th March, 1998. Finding no redress before the Income Tax Authorities as well as the Tribunal respondent preferred Income Tax Appeal No,158 of 1998 before the learned High Court of Sindh. 3. The appellant objected to the maintainability of the appeal on the bar of limitation but the High Court vide impugned judgment converted the appeal into a writ petition and allowed the same. As such instant appeal has been filed." 2. The operative part of the judgment is incorporated in paragraphs 6 and 7 which read:-- '6. For the foregoing reasons we are of the opinion that the learned High Court should not have converted the time barred appeal into a constitution petition for the purpose of considering the case of the respondent on merits as the impugned judgment/order had attained finality much before filing of the appeal before the High Court. 7. Thus for the foregoing reasons the appeal is allowed and the impugned judgment of the High Court is set aside with no order as to costs." 3 A Review Petition (CRP No,310/2006) was filed which was allowed on the ground that contrary to the reference in the judgment under review that the High Court had converted time barred appeal into .Writ Petition and allowed the same the Court had actually decided the appeal and thus there was error apparent on the. Face of record. Consequently the judgment of 27.04.2006 was recalled and the appeal (C.A. No,761 /2000) was ordered to be deemed pending. The appeal therefore came up for hearing today. 4. The learned counsel for the respondent raised a preliminary objection that since under section 137 of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1979 (hereinafter to be referred to as the "Ordinance"), appeal lies to the Supreme Conn against the judgment of the High Court delivered under section 136 of the Ordinance, petition for leave to appeal filed by the appellants was not maintainable. The learned counsel for the appellant made attempts to justify filing of the petition contending that since the High Court could not have entertained the appeal, as only Reference maintainable against the order of the Tribunal, the judgment of the High Court cannot be treated as having been delivered in a Reference filed under section 136 of the Ordinance. This argument is without merits. Whether the High Court was possessed with powers or not to entertain die appeal under section 136 of the Ordinance the impugned order was passed under that provision of law and thus appeal under section 137 of the Ordinance and not petition for leave to appeal was maintainable. The time limitation for filing the appeal is 30 days while the petition for leave to appeal was filed on 06.03.2000 impugning the order of the High Court dated 03.01.2000. Therefore, it would be barred by time even if treated as an appeal. The appeal is, therefore, dismissed. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-14 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem