EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX vs PARKE DAVIS (INDIA) LIMITED Income-tax Case No.93 of 1998 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX Respondant: PARKE DAVIS (INDIA) LIMITED Result: Application dismissed Judgment Date: 1999-06-08 Court: Andhra Paradesh High Court Judges: P. Venkatarama Reddy A. Hanumanthu Citations Advocates Statutes 2001 P T D 2313 Judgment JUDGMENT P. VENKATARAMA REDDI, J.---This is an application filed by the Commissioner of Income-tax, A.P.I. Under section 256(2) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, seeking reference of certain questions of law for the opinion of this Court. As we are of the view of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh has no jurisdiction to entertain this petition, we are not expressing any view on the merits whether any of the questions are questions of law to be referred for the opinion of the High Court. The appeals before the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, Mumbai-E Bench, (it is not clear whether it is E-Bench or B-Bench) arose out of the assessment made for the year 1983-84 under section 143(3) by the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner, Assessment Range-V(A), Bombay. The reference application was dismissed by the Mumbai D-Bench by an order, dated March 18, 1997, communicated to the respondent on. July 15, 1997. The application under section 256(2) in our view should have been filed in the High Court of Bombay and this Court has no territorial, jurisdiction to entertain and decide the application. The words "the High Court" occurring in section 256 have obviously reference to the High Court within whose jurisdiction the Appellate Tribunal which declined to state the case, is located. It is not open to the petitioner to choose any other High Court for filing the application under section 256(2). The apparent reason for filing the application in the Andhra Pradesh High Court, though not disclosed in the petition as such, seems to be that subsequent to the disposal of the appeal, the assessment files of the respondent company were transferred to Hyderabad and, therefore, all the proceedings, in whatever form they are, pertaining to the assessments past or present, should be dealt with by the authorities or Courts having jurisdiction over Hyderabad. Learned standing counsel for the Department sought to justify the action of the petitioner in filing the reference application in the Andhra Pradesh High Court on the basis of the Explanation to section 127 of the Income-tax Act. Section 127(1) deals with the power of the DirectorGeneral/Chief Commissioner/Commissioner to transfer the case from one Assessing Officer to another at any stage of the pro.Ceedings. The Explanation amplifies the meaning of the word "case" and it reads as follows: "Explanation.---In section 120 and this section, the word 'case', in relation to any person whose name is specified in any order or direction issued thereunder, means all proceedings under this Act in respect of any year which may be pending on the date of such order or direction or which may have been completed on or before such date, and includes also all proceedings under this Act which may be commenced after the date of such order or direction in respect of any year." We are unable to appreciate how section 127 together with its Explanation could be resorted to transfer the proceedings from one Appellate Tribunal to another and to vest the jurisdiction in the High Court which it does not otherwise possess. The whole purport and purpose of section 127 is to transfer the proceedings from one Assessing Officer to another. The Explanation should be understood in relation to the main provision which stipulates the transfer of case from one or more Assessing Officers to any other Assessing Officer or Officers. The words "all proceedings under the Act in respect of any year" occurring in the Explanation cannot be understood in vacuum and cannot be stretched to cover reference applications already filed or decided by the date of transfer under section 127. The reference application having been rejected by the Mumbai Bench of the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, the application under section 256(2) ought to have been filed before the High Court of Bombay only. The interpretation sought to be placed on the Explanation to section 127 leads to incongruous results quite contrary to the scheme of the Act and has the effect of investing the prescribed authorities with the power to virtually interfere with the territorial jurisdiction of the concerned High Court. Hence, we are of the view that this I.T.C. Under section 256(2) is not maintainable, as this Court has no jurisdiction. Hence, the I.T.C. Is dismissed. . www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Andhra Paradesh High Court Judge(s): P. Venkatarama Reddy, A. Hanumanthu Title: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX vs PARKE DAVIS (INDIA) LIMITED Case No.: Income-tax Case No.93 of 1998 Date of Judgment: 1999-06-08 Reported As: 2001 P T D 2313 Result: Application dismissed Judgment JUDGMENT P. VENKATARAMA REDDI, J.---This is an application filed by the Commissioner of Income-tax, A.P.I. Under section 256(2) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, seeking reference of certain questions of law for the opinion of this Court. As we are of the view of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh has no jurisdiction to entertain this petition, we are not expressing any view on the merits whether any of the questions are questions of law to be referred for the opinion of the High Court. The appeals before the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, Mumbai-E Bench, (it is not clear whether it is E-Bench or B-Bench) arose out of the assessment made for the year 1983-84 under section 143(3) by the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner, Assessment Range-V(A), Bombay. The reference application was dismissed by the Mumbai D-Bench by an order, dated March 18, 1997, communicated to the respondent on. July 15, 1997. The application under section 256(2) in our view should have been filed in the High Court of Bombay and this Court has no territorial, jurisdiction to entertain and decide the application. The words "the High Court" occurring in section 256 have obviously reference to the High Court within whose jurisdiction the Appellate Tribunal which declined to state the case, is located. It is not open to the petitioner to choose any other High Court for filing the application under section 256(2). The apparent reason for filing the application in the Andhra Pradesh High Court, though not disclosed in the petition as such, seems to be that subsequent to the disposal of the appeal, the assessment files of the respondent company were transferred to Hyderabad and, therefore, all the proceedings, in whatever form they are, pertaining to the assessments past or present, should be dealt with by the authorities or Courts having jurisdiction over Hyderabad. Learned standing counsel for the Department sought to justify the action of the petitioner in filing the reference application in the Andhra Pradesh High Court on the basis of the Explanation to section 127 of the Income-tax Act. Section 127(1) deals with the power of the DirectorGeneral/Chief Commissioner/Commissioner to transfer the case from one Assessing Officer to another at any stage of the pro.Ceedings. The Explanation amplifies the meaning of the word "case" and it reads as follows: "Explanation.---In section 120 and this section, the word 'case', in relation to any person whose name is specified in any order or direction issued thereunder, means all proceedings under this Act in respect of any year which may be pending on the date of such order or direction or which may have been completed on or before such date, and includes also all proceedings under this Act which may be commenced after the date of such order or direction in respect of any year." We are unable to appreciate how section 127 together with its Explanation could be resorted to transfer the proceedings from one Appellate Tribunal to another and to vest the jurisdiction in the High Court which it does not otherwise possess. The whole purport and purpose of section 127 is to transfer the proceedings from one Assessing Officer to another. The Explanation should be understood in relation to the main provision which stipulates the transfer of case from one or more Assessing Officers to any other Assessing Officer or Officers. The words "all proceedings under the Act in respect of any year" occurring in the Explanation cannot be understood in vacuum and cannot be stretched to cover reference applications already filed or decided by the date of transfer under section 127. The reference application having been rejected by the Mumbai Bench of the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, the application under section 256(2) ought to have been filed before the High Court of Bombay only. The interpretation sought to be placed on the Explanation to section 127 leads to incongruous results quite contrary to the scheme of the Act and has the effect of investing the prescribed authorities with the power to virtually interfere with the territorial jurisdiction of the concerned High Court. Hence, we are of the view that this I.T.C. Under section 256(2) is not maintainable, as this Court has no jurisdiction. Hence, the I.T.C. Is dismissed. . Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem