EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX vs VENKATESWARA TRADERS Case No. 12 of 1996 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX Respondant: VENKATESWARA TRADERS Result: Order accordingly Judgment Date: 2000-07-12 Court: Andhra Paradesh High Court Judges: B. Sudershan Reddy Syed Shah Mohammad Quadri Citations Advocates Statutes 2000 P T D 725 Judgment JUDGMENT SYED SHAH MOHAMMED QUADRI, J.-- In this application under section 256(2) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, the Revenue seeks a direction to the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal to refer the following questions of law to this Court for opinion: "(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal is justified in reducing the income to Rs.40,000 from Rs.1,85,000 for the assessment year 1984-85? (2) Whether, on the facts, and in the circumstances of the case, the Income-tax Appellate-Tribunal is correct in upholding the decision of the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals) regarding granting of registration?" <p.m></p.m> www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Andhra Paradesh High Court Judge(s): B. Sudershan Reddy, Syed Shah Mohammad Quadri Title: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX vs VENKATESWARA TRADERS Case No.: Case No. 12 of 1996 Date of Judgment: 2000-07-12 Reported As: 2000 P T D 725 Result: Order accordingly Judgment JUDGMENT SYED SHAH MOHAMMED QUADRI, J.-- In this application under section 256(2) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, the Revenue seeks a direction to the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal to refer the following questions of law to this Court for opinion: "(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal is justified in reducing the income to Rs.40,000 from Rs.1,85,000 for the assessment year 1984-85? (2) Whether, on the facts, and in the circumstances of the case, the Income-tax Appellate-Tribunal is correct in upholding the decision of the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals) regarding granting of registration?" <p.m></p.m> Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem