EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX vs LALJI SINGH GOVIND SINGH Income-tax Reference No,223 of 1980 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX Respondant: LALJI SINGH GOVIND SINGH Result: Order accordingly Judgment Date: 1996-07-01 Court: Allahabad High Court Judges: B. M. Lal B. Dikshit Citations Advocates Statutes 1999 P T D 2150 Judgment JUDGMENT ' This is a reference under section 256(2) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the Act), and the following questions of law have been referred to this Court: "(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was legally correct in holding that the order passed by the Income-tax Officer was one under section 185 and not under section 184(4)? (2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was legally correct in holding that an appeal could be filed against an order under section 184(4) of the Income-tax Act?" ' The assessee-firm carried on whole sale cloth business. The firm came into existence by a deed of partnership dated October 24, 1965, consisting of four partners. The firm was assessed as a registered firm. However, it appears that some changes had taken place in the firm on account of the death of one of the partners and, therefore, complying with the provisions of subsection (4) of section 184 of the Act the firm was obliged to furnish a certified copy of the revised partnership deed alongwith the return of income for the assessment year relevant to such previous year, but the same had not been complied with well within the period of limitation stipulated in the Act and the Rules framed thereunder. However, the same was filed subsequently alongwith an application for condonation of delay. Since the application was not made in accordance with the provisions of subsection (4) of section 184 of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder within the period of limitation, the application was rejected against which an appeal was filed. The First Appellate Authority held that a bare perusal of subsection (4) of section 184 of the Act contemplates that no appeal is maintainable under section 246 of the Act. However, against this finding, the assessee preferred an appeal before the Tribunal and the Tribunal reached the conclusion that an appeal lies against this order even if it is passed under subsection (4) of section 184 of the Act which has resulted in refusing the registration, i,e,, having the same effect contemplated under section 185 of the Act against which the Revenue has come up before this Court. ' A bare reading of section 185 of the Act envisages that in pursuance of an order passed under section 185 of the Act all the provisions of the Act shall apply accordingly, meaning thereby the provisions of appeal, revision, etc., are applicable to the orders arising out of the provisions of section 185 of the Act. But the language used in subsection (4) of section 184 of the Act admittedly does not envisage appeal or revision. It appears that on this analogy, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner denied the right of appeal to the assessee holding that the orders arising out of the provisions of section 184 do not envisage appeal or revision. ' Shri R.K. Agarwal, learned counsel appearing for the Revenue, is fair enough to concede contending that even if an order passed under subsection (4) of section 184 of the Act results in refusing the registration within the meaning of section 185 of the Act, the same is also appealable. This is what has been held by the apex Court in C.I.T. v. Ashoka Engineering Co. (1992) 194 ITR 645. ' Thus, the matter in issue having been covered by the apex Court decision referred ,to above, the questions are answered in the affirmative in favour of the assessee. ' The reference is answered accordingly. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Allahabad High Court Judge(s): B. M. Lal, B. Dikshit Title: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX vs LALJI SINGH GOVIND SINGH Case No.: Income-tax Reference No,223 of 1980 Date of Judgment: 1996-07-01 Reported As: 1999 P T D 2150 Result: Order accordingly Judgment JUDGMENT ' This is a reference under section 256(2) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the Act), and the following questions of law have been referred to this Court: "(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was legally correct in holding that the order passed by the Income-tax Officer was one under section 185 and not under section 184(4)? (2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was legally correct in holding that an appeal could be filed against an order under section 184(4) of the Income-tax Act?" ' The assessee-firm carried on whole sale cloth business. The firm came into existence by a deed of partnership dated October 24, 1965, consisting of four partners. The firm was assessed as a registered firm. However, it appears that some changes had taken place in the firm on account of the death of one of the partners and, therefore, complying with the provisions of subsection (4) of section 184 of the Act the firm was obliged to furnish a certified copy of the revised partnership deed alongwith the return of income for the assessment year relevant to such previous year, but the same had not been complied with well within the period of limitation stipulated in the Act and the Rules framed thereunder. However, the same was filed subsequently alongwith an application for condonation of delay. Since the application was not made in accordance with the provisions of subsection (4) of section 184 of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder within the period of limitation, the application was rejected against which an appeal was filed. The First Appellate Authority held that a bare perusal of subsection (4) of section 184 of the Act contemplates that no appeal is maintainable under section 246 of the Act. However, against this finding, the assessee preferred an appeal before the Tribunal and the Tribunal reached the conclusion that an appeal lies against this order even if it is passed under subsection (4) of section 184 of the Act which has resulted in refusing the registration, i,e,, having the same effect contemplated under section 185 of the Act against which the Revenue has come up before this Court. ' A bare reading of section 185 of the Act envisages that in pursuance of an order passed under section 185 of the Act all the provisions of the Act shall apply accordingly, meaning thereby the provisions of appeal, revision, etc., are applicable to the orders arising out of the provisions of section 185 of the Act. But the language used in subsection (4) of section 184 of the Act admittedly does not envisage appeal or revision. It appears that on this analogy, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner denied the right of appeal to the assessee holding that the orders arising out of the provisions of section 184 do not envisage appeal or revision. ' Shri R.K. Agarwal, learned counsel appearing for the Revenue, is fair enough to concede contending that even if an order passed under subsection (4) of section 184 of the Act results in refusing the registration within the meaning of section 185 of the Act, the same is also appealable. This is what has been held by the apex Court in C.I.T. v. Ashoka Engineering Co. (1992) 194 ITR 645. ' Thus, the matter in issue having been covered by the apex Court decision referred ,to above, the questions are answered in the affirmative in favour of the assessee. ' The reference is answered accordingly. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem