EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX vs MARGADARSI CHIT FUND (P.) LTD. Income tax Case No,14 of 1997 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX Respondant: MARGADARSI CHIT FUND (P.) LTD. Result: Case dismissed Judgment Date: 1997-03-13 Court: Andhra Paradesh High Court Judges: B. Sudershan Reddy Lingaraja Rath Citations Advocates Statutes 1999 P T D 1803 Judgment JUDGMENT ' LINGARAJA RATH, J.---The question submitted by the Revenue seeking to call for a reference from the Tribunal is whether the Tribunal has been right to hold the deduction allowable under section 32 of the Income-tax Act, to the assessee on the purchase of the bottles which it leased out as a business. The submission of Mr. S.R. Ashok, learned counsel for the petitioner, is that even if for the purpose of the business of the respondent the bottles are treated as "plant" within the meaning of section 32(1), yet the deduction is allowable only when the purchase is en bloc and cannot be allowed in respect of single bottles which would obviously be priced less than Rs, 5,000. The Tribunal placed reliance on the decision of this Court in CIT v. Sri Krishna Bottlers (Pvt.) Ltd. (1989) 175 ITR 154, to hold bottles as "plant" and 100 per cent. Depreciation could be available. ' The impugned assessment is of the year 1985-86. Section 32(1) is in the following terms:-- "32. Depreciation.---(1) In respect of depreciation of buildings, machinery, plant or furniture owned by the assessee and used for the purpose of the business or profession, the following deductions shall, subject to the provisions of section 34, be allowed---" ' The first proviso to the subsection which was amended by the Finance Act, 1983, with effect from April 1st, 1984, and was applicable to the assessment in question was as follows:-- (ii) in the case of any block of assets, such percentage on the written down value thereof as may be prescribed:-- ' Provided that where the actual cost of any machinery or plant does not exceed five thousand rupees, the actual costs thereof shall be allowed as a deduction in respect of the previous year in which such machinery or plant is first put to use by the assessee for the purposes of his business or profession; ' In Krishna Bottlers' case (1989) 175 ITR 154 (AP), the Court held, while deciding that the bottles containing soft drink cannot be stock-in-trade, as follows (Page 170):-- "What is the function these bottles and shells perform in the assessee's trade? Are they essentially tools in the assessee's business? In our opinion, yes. The bottles are essential tools of the trade, for it is through them that the soft drink is passed on from the assessee to the customer. Without these bottles, the soft drink cannot be effectively transported. The bottles and shells also satisfy the durability test for it is nobody's case that their life is too transitory or negligible to warrant as inference that they have no function to play in the assessee's trade. They are therefore, 'plant' for the purposes of the Act." ' Adopting the logic, it can be well said that since it is the business of the respondent to purchase the bottles for the purpose of leasing them out as a business, the bottles do constitute 'plant' for the purpose of his business or profession. Once such a ground applies and indeed the fact is conceded by Mr. S.R. Ashok, in view of the decision in Krishna Bottlers' case (1989) 175 ITR 154 (AP), the further question raised by learned counsel does not arise. There is no distinction that the purchase on which the depreciation would be allowed must be bulk purchase of a large number and that it would be disallowed if the purchase is of single items. There is no evidence that the bottles in respect of which depreciation was claimed were not the subject of bulk purchase. Even apart from it, a bulk purchase is merely individualized purchased made collectively and we do not find any distinction in the provisions of section 32(1) or the proviso, distinction possible to be drawn in the manner suggested. The only test is whether the article in respect of which depreciation is claimed is "plant" for the purpose of the business or profession. Individual items of purchase would also be 'plant', if it is integrally involved in the carrying out of the profession or business and depreciation could be claimed in respect of that. In that view of the matter, we concur with the view taken by the Tribunal and do not find any merit in the petition justifying the call for a reference. ' The I.T.C. Is dismissed. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Andhra Paradesh High Court Judge(s): B. Sudershan Reddy, Lingaraja Rath Title: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX vs MARGADARSI CHIT FUND (P.) LTD. Case No.: Income tax Case No,14 of 1997 Date of Judgment: 1997-03-13 Reported As: 1999 P T D 1803 Result: Case dismissed Judgment JUDGMENT ' LINGARAJA RATH, J.---The question submitted by the Revenue seeking to call for a reference from the Tribunal is whether the Tribunal has been right to hold the deduction allowable under section 32 of the Income-tax Act, to the assessee on the purchase of the bottles which it leased out as a business. The submission of Mr. S.R. Ashok, learned counsel for the petitioner, is that even if for the purpose of the business of the respondent the bottles are treated as "plant" within the meaning of section 32(1), yet the deduction is allowable only when the purchase is en bloc and cannot be allowed in respect of single bottles which would obviously be priced less than Rs, 5,000. The Tribunal placed reliance on the decision of this Court in CIT v. Sri Krishna Bottlers (Pvt.) Ltd. (1989) 175 ITR 154, to hold bottles as "plant" and 100 per cent. Depreciation could be available. ' The impugned assessment is of the year 1985-86. Section 32(1) is in the following terms:-- "32. Depreciation.---(1) In respect of depreciation of buildings, machinery, plant or furniture owned by the assessee and used for the purpose of the business or profession, the following deductions shall, subject to the provisions of section 34, be allowed---" ' The first proviso to the subsection which was amended by the Finance Act, 1983, with effect from April 1st, 1984, and was applicable to the assessment in question was as follows:-- (ii) in the case of any block of assets, such percentage on the written down value thereof as may be prescribed:-- ' Provided that where the actual cost of any machinery or plant does not exceed five thousand rupees, the actual costs thereof shall be allowed as a deduction in respect of the previous year in which such machinery or plant is first put to use by the assessee for the purposes of his business or profession; ' In Krishna Bottlers' case (1989) 175 ITR 154 (AP), the Court held, while deciding that the bottles containing soft drink cannot be stock-in-trade, as follows (Page 170):-- "What is the function these bottles and shells perform in the assessee's trade? Are they essentially tools in the assessee's business? In our opinion, yes. The bottles are essential tools of the trade, for it is through them that the soft drink is passed on from the assessee to the customer. Without these bottles, the soft drink cannot be effectively transported. The bottles and shells also satisfy the durability test for it is nobody's case that their life is too transitory or negligible to warrant as inference that they have no function to play in the assessee's trade. They are therefore, 'plant' for the purposes of the Act." ' Adopting the logic, it can be well said that since it is the business of the respondent to purchase the bottles for the purpose of leasing them out as a business, the bottles do constitute 'plant' for the purpose of his business or profession. Once such a ground applies and indeed the fact is conceded by Mr. S.R. Ashok, in view of the decision in Krishna Bottlers' case (1989) 175 ITR 154 (AP), the further question raised by learned counsel does not arise. There is no distinction that the purchase on which the depreciation would be allowed must be bulk purchase of a large number and that it would be disallowed if the purchase is of single items. There is no evidence that the bottles in respect of which depreciation was claimed were not the subject of bulk purchase. Even apart from it, a bulk purchase is merely individualized purchased made collectively and we do not find any distinction in the provisions of section 32(1) or the proviso, distinction possible to be drawn in the manner suggested. The only test is whether the article in respect of which depreciation is claimed is "plant" for the purpose of the business or profession. Individual items of purchase would also be 'plant', if it is integrally involved in the carrying out of the profession or business and depreciation could be claimed in respect of that. In that view of the matter, we concur with the view taken by the Tribunal and do not find any merit in the petition justifying the call for a reference. ' The I.T.C. Is dismissed. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem