EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX vs VIGHYAN CHEMICALS INDUSTRIES Application No,49 of 1992, Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX Respondant: VIGHYAN CHEMICALS INDUSTRIES Result: Application rejected Judgment Date: 1992-07-13 Court: Allahabad High Court Judges: R. K. Gulati A. P. Singh Citations Advocates Statutes 1993 P T D 1391 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT ' R.K. GULATI; J.---This is an application under section 256(2) of the Income Tax Act, 1961. ' Having heard learned counsel for the parties, in our opinion, the order of the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal is concluded by the fmdings of fact. To the income returned by the asseessee, two additions, amongst others, were made, one on account of the value of suppressed sales amounting to Rs,10,96,605 and the other for difference in stock as per books and that pledged with the bank for which an addition of Rs,21,260 was made. ' The Commissioner of Income-tax Appeals, Meerut, deleted both the additions. That order was confirmed in second appeal at the instance of the Revenue by the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal. The Tribunal found as a fact that production of lime, disclosed by the assessee, from the lime stone was not low which was 50 per cent. Another finding recorded by the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal was that the Income-tax Officer had proceeded to make the addition of Rs,10,06,605 on an erroneous assumption and the expert opinion obtained by him had no relevance to the case of the assessee. In this application under section 256(2) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, the Revenue has sought reference of the question whether, on the facts and circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was correct in law in confirming the order of the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals) deleting the addition in question on account of suppressed sales. In confirming the order of the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals), the Tribunal has discussed the matter at length and has found that the additions made by the Income-tax Officer cannot be sustained on the material that existed on the record. Nothing was brought to our notice, as a result of which, the findings recorded by the Tribunal could be held to be vitiated. Whether the production shown in a given case is adequate or not is essentially a question of fact which does not involve any question of law. ' In so far as the second addition is concerned, the Tribunal has accepted the explanation furnished by the assessee that part of the stock pledged with the bank was that of a third party. The Tribunal having believed the version of the assessee and the evidence placed before it, in our opinion, it again does not give rise to any question of law. ' This application is without any substance and is, accordingly, rejected. There shall be no order as to costs. . www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Allahabad High Court Judge(s): R. K. Gulati, A. P. Singh Title: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX vs VIGHYAN CHEMICALS INDUSTRIES Case No.: Application No,49 of 1992, Date of Judgment: 1992-07-13 Reported As: 1993 P T D 1391 Result: Application rejected Judgment JUDGMENT ' R.K. GULATI; J.---This is an application under section 256(2) of the Income Tax Act, 1961. ' Having heard learned counsel for the parties, in our opinion, the order of the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal is concluded by the fmdings of fact. To the income returned by the asseessee, two additions, amongst others, were made, one on account of the value of suppressed sales amounting to Rs,10,96,605 and the other for difference in stock as per books and that pledged with the bank for which an addition of Rs,21,260 was made. ' The Commissioner of Income-tax Appeals, Meerut, deleted both the additions. That order was confirmed in second appeal at the instance of the Revenue by the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal. The Tribunal found as a fact that production of lime, disclosed by the assessee, from the lime stone was not low which was 50 per cent. Another finding recorded by the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal was that the Income-tax Officer had proceeded to make the addition of Rs,10,06,605 on an erroneous assumption and the expert opinion obtained by him had no relevance to the case of the assessee. In this application under section 256(2) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, the Revenue has sought reference of the question whether, on the facts and circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was correct in law in confirming the order of the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals) deleting the addition in question on account of suppressed sales. In confirming the order of the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals), the Tribunal has discussed the matter at length and has found that the additions made by the Income-tax Officer cannot be sustained on the material that existed on the record. Nothing was brought to our notice, as a result of which, the findings recorded by the Tribunal could be held to be vitiated. Whether the production shown in a given case is adequate or not is essentially a question of fact which does not involve any question of law. ' In so far as the second addition is concerned, the Tribunal has accepted the explanation furnished by the assessee that part of the stock pledged with the bank was that of a third party. The Tribunal having believed the version of the assessee and the evidence placed before it, in our opinion, it again does not give rise to any question of law. ' This application is without any substance and is, accordingly, rejected. There shall be no order as to costs. . Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem