EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX vs SHERVANI SUGAR SYNDICATE LTD. Income Tax Application No,55 of 1991, Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX Respondant: SHERVANI SUGAR SYNDICATE LTD. Result: Order accordingly Judgment Date: 1992-03-31 Court: Allahabad High Court Judges: R. K. Gulati Anshuman Singh Citations Advocates Statutes 1993 P T D 1511 Judgment JUDGMENT ' After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that the following questions of law do arise out of the order of the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal:- "(1) Whether in law and on the facts of the case, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal has not exceeded its jurisdiction by admitting and allowing the miscellaneous application of the assessee when it amounted to revision of its own order which is not permissible in law and which cannot be covered as a mistake apparent from record which only can be rectified under section 256(2)? (2) Whether in law and on the facts the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal was correct in holding that the closing stock of free sugar as on August 30, 1978, should be valued at two different rates, i,e,, 42,704 quintals should be valued at Rs,85,58,293 being the amount realised on sale up to November 30, 1978, which is after the closing of the previous year and the balance sugar of 28,789 quintals should be valued at Rs,207.86 per quintal which was the cost price as on June 30, 1978, and thus adopting an altogether new principle which has got no sanctity in law and in accountancy?" ' Accordingly, we direct the Tribunal to draw up a statement of the case and refer the aforesaid questions to this Court for its opinion. However, there will be no order as to costs. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Allahabad High Court Judge(s): R. K. Gulati, Anshuman Singh Title: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX vs SHERVANI SUGAR SYNDICATE LTD. Case No.: Income Tax Application No,55 of 1991, Date of Judgment: 1992-03-31 Reported As: 1993 P T D 1511 Result: Order accordingly Judgment JUDGMENT ' After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that the following questions of law do arise out of the order of the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal:- "(1) Whether in law and on the facts of the case, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal has not exceeded its jurisdiction by admitting and allowing the miscellaneous application of the assessee when it amounted to revision of its own order which is not permissible in law and which cannot be covered as a mistake apparent from record which only can be rectified under section 256(2)? (2) Whether in law and on the facts the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal was correct in holding that the closing stock of free sugar as on August 30, 1978, should be valued at two different rates, i,e,, 42,704 quintals should be valued at Rs,85,58,293 being the amount realised on sale up to November 30, 1978, which is after the closing of the previous year and the balance sugar of 28,789 quintals should be valued at Rs,207.86 per quintal which was the cost price as on June 30, 1978, and thus adopting an altogether new principle which has got no sanctity in law and in accountancy?" ' Accordingly, we direct the Tribunal to draw up a statement of the case and refer the aforesaid questions to this Court for its opinion. However, there will be no order as to costs. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem