EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark COMMISSIONER OF WEALTH-TAX vs GAJU Wealth Tax Application No, 192 of 1991, Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: COMMISSIONER OF WEALTH-TAX Respondant: GAJU Result: Order accordinly Judgment Date: 1991-11-14 Court: Allahabad High Court Judges: A. N. Verrna R. K. Gulati Citations Advocates Statutes 1993 P T D 1269 Judgment JUDGMENT ' A.N. VARMA, J.---Having heard learned standing counsel on behalf of the Commissioner of Wealth-tax and having perused the written arguments submitted on behalf of the assessee, we are of the opinion that the following question of law does arise out of the order of the Tribunal: "Whether, in the circumstances of the case, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal was legally correct in confirming the order of the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) on the point of value of land at the rate of Rs,2.80 per square yard?" ' The second question framed in the application stresses only one aspect of the first question. It is hence not necessary to call for any statement on that question. We, accordingly, direct the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal to state the case and refer the aforesaid question for our opinion. There will be no order as to costs. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Allahabad High Court Judge(s): A. N. Verrna, R. K. Gulati Title: COMMISSIONER OF WEALTH-TAX vs GAJU Case No.: Wealth Tax Application No, 192 of 1991, Date of Judgment: 1991-11-14 Reported As: 1993 P T D 1269 Result: Order accordinly Judgment JUDGMENT ' A.N. VARMA, J.---Having heard learned standing counsel on behalf of the Commissioner of Wealth-tax and having perused the written arguments submitted on behalf of the assessee, we are of the opinion that the following question of law does arise out of the order of the Tribunal: "Whether, in the circumstances of the case, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal was legally correct in confirming the order of the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) on the point of value of land at the rate of Rs,2.80 per square yard?" ' The second question framed in the application stresses only one aspect of the first question. It is hence not necessary to call for any statement on that question. We, accordingly, direct the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal to state the case and refer the aforesaid question for our opinion. There will be no order as to costs. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem