EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark D.V. KRISHNA MURTHY vs P. VISWANATH C. R.P. No. 2271 of 1989, Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: D.V. KRISHNA MURTHY Respondant: P. VISWANATH Result: N/A Judgment Date: 1993-03-15 Court: Andhra Paradesh High Court Judges: G Radha Krishna Rao Citations Advocates Statutes 1996 P.C.T.L.R. 1128 Judgment JUDGMENT G. RADHAKRISHNA RAO, J.- The revision is directed against the Order passed by the District Munsif, Hindupur in I.A. No. 189/89 in O.S. No. 24/89. The suit, was filed against the firm and its partners. Pending disposal of the suit, an application was filed under Order 38, rule 5, C.P.C., to attach the properties of one of the partners i.e., the third defendant who is the petitioner herein. After counter was filed, the lower Court ordered attachment before Judgment. Aggrieved by the said! Order, the present revision is filed. 2. Sri R.V. Prasad, learned counsel for the petitioner contended that in case the partnership firm falls in debts, the properties of the individual partners cannot be attached before judgment. In support of the above contention, he relied upon Section 49 of the Indian Partnership Act, which reads as follows: "49. Payment of firm debts and of separate debts:- Where there are joint debts due from the firm, and also separate debts due from any partner the property of the firm shall be applied in the first instance in payment of the debts of the firm, and, if there is any surplus, than the share of each partner shall be applied in payment of his separate debts or paid to him. The separate property of any partner shall be applied first in the payment of his separate debts, and the surplus (if any) in the payment of the debts of the firm." 3. In view of the above provisions, Section 49 cannot come in aid of the petitioner herein, who is 3rd defendant, to contend that before the decree has been passed, the question of attaching the property does not arise. Section 25 of the Indian Partnership Act reads as follows: "25. Liability of a partner for acts of the firm:- Every partner is Liable, jointly with all the other partners and also severally, for all acts of the firm done while he is a partner." 4. In the. Case of partnership, each partner is Liable So when each partner is Liable, in the event of passing of a decree and in the event of the apprehension of the plaintiff that one of the partners is screening away the property and is removing the same from out of the jurisdiction of the Court, and on enquiry, the Court is competent to pass an order under Order 38, rule 5, CPC. In the instant case also, the third defendant, who is the petitioner herein, was impleaded As a party in the main suit also. So, when he is a partner and when he is also a signatory to the promissory note and when a suit is filed against all the partners, the Court is competent to pass an order under Order 38, rule 5, C.P.C., by following the procedure duly contemplated therein. Therefore, there is neither illegality nor irregularity in the order passed by the lower Court. 5. The revision petition is dismissed, accordingly. No costs. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Andhra Paradesh High Court Judge(s): G Radha Krishna Rao Title: D.V. KRISHNA MURTHY vs P. VISWANATH Case No.: C. R.P. No. 2271 of 1989, Date of Judgment: 1993-03-15 Reported As: 1996 P.C.T.L.R. 1128 Result: N/A Judgment JUDGMENT G. RADHAKRISHNA RAO, J.- The revision is directed against the Order passed by the District Munsif, Hindupur in I.A. No. 189/89 in O.S. No. 24/89. The suit, was filed against the firm and its partners. Pending disposal of the suit, an application was filed under Order 38, rule 5, C.P.C., to attach the properties of one of the partners i.e., the third defendant who is the petitioner herein. After counter was filed, the lower Court ordered attachment before Judgment. Aggrieved by the said! Order, the present revision is filed. 2. Sri R.V. Prasad, learned counsel for the petitioner contended that in case the partnership firm falls in debts, the properties of the individual partners cannot be attached before judgment. In support of the above contention, he relied upon Section 49 of the Indian Partnership Act, which reads as follows: "49. Payment of firm debts and of separate debts:- Where there are joint debts due from the firm, and also separate debts due from any partner the property of the firm shall be applied in the first instance in payment of the debts of the firm, and, if there is any surplus, than the share of each partner shall be applied in payment of his separate debts or paid to him. The separate property of any partner shall be applied first in the payment of his separate debts, and the surplus (if any) in the payment of the debts of the firm." 3. In view of the above provisions, Section 49 cannot come in aid of the petitioner herein, who is 3rd defendant, to contend that before the decree has been passed, the question of attaching the property does not arise. Section 25 of the Indian Partnership Act reads as follows: "25. Liability of a partner for acts of the firm:- Every partner is Liable, jointly with all the other partners and also severally, for all acts of the firm done while he is a partner." 4. In the. Case of partnership, each partner is Liable So when each partner is Liable, in the event of passing of a decree and in the event of the apprehension of the plaintiff that one of the partners is screening away the property and is removing the same from out of the jurisdiction of the Court, and on enquiry, the Court is competent to pass an order under Order 38, rule 5, CPC. In the instant case also, the third defendant, who is the petitioner herein, was impleaded As a party in the main suit also. So, when he is a partner and when he is also a signatory to the promissory note and when a suit is filed against all the partners, the Court is competent to pass an order under Order 38, rule 5, C.P.C., by following the procedure duly contemplated therein. Therefore, there is neither illegality nor irregularity in the order passed by the lower Court. 5. The revision petition is dismissed, accordingly. No costs. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem