EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark Dr. BASHIR AHMED KHAWAJA, LIVESTOCK OFFICER, FARM L.D.R.C. AMBORE, MUZAFFARABAD vs AZAD GOVERNMENT OF THE STATE OF JAMMU & KASHMIR through its Chief Secretary and 5 others Service Appeal No, 83 of 2005 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: Dr. BASHIR AHMED KHAWAJA, LIVESTOCK OFFICER, FARM L.D.R.C. AMBORE, MUZAFFARABAD Respondant: AZAD GOVERNMENT OF THE STATE OF JAMMU & KASHMIR through its Chief Secretary and 5 others Result: Appeal dismissed Judgment Date: 2008-02-01 Court: Azad Jammu and Kashmir Service Tribunal Judges: Azhar Saleem Babar Muhammad Rashid Khan Citations Advocates Statutes PLJ 2009 Tr.C. (Services) 216 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT Azhar Saleem Babar, Member. --The above titled appeal was instituted on 31.3.2005. It was admitted for regular hearing on 18.4.2005. The appellant has challenged the validity of seniority list dated 31.12.2004 through the instant appeal, whereby Respondents No, 5 and 6 have been enlisted in the department of Extension, Research and Development Animal Husbandry. 2. The facts making background of the above titled appeal are that the appellant is a regular employee of the Animal Husbandry Department possessing the education of DVM. M.Sc (Hons.) Poultry Husbandry. Seniority in different cadres of the department was common, when the Government was inclined to formulate departmental rules in the years 2000-2001 and two different functional units were constituted which were named as "Animal Health" and the department of "Extension, Research and Development". In furtherance thereto, two Directorates were constituted and seniority lists in two different functional units were also formulated. It has been contended on behalf of the appellant that the names of Respondents No, 5 and 6 were wrongly included in the Department of Extension, Research and Development. The appellant claims that Respondents No, 5 and 6 belong to the Animal Health Department, so the notification dated 31.12.2004 naming the respondents in the seniority list impugned are contrary to the law. The appellant has contended in para 3 of memorandum of appeal that Respondents No, 5 and 6 were appointed as Assistant Diseases Investigation Officer vide notification dated 21.7.1996 and the posts of incumbents were later on upgraded to NPS-18. The respondents were promoted against the posts of District Kotli and District Mirpur. Including different grounds for setting aside the impugned seniority list to the extent of Respondents No, 5 and 6, the appellant has further claimed that Respondents No, 5 and 6 do not qualify to be appointed in the Department of Extension, Research and Development rather they are qualified to be included in the department of Animal Health, so the impugned seniority list suffers from legal lacuna. The appellant further claims that Respondents No, 5 and 6 were junior to the appellant and by wrong inclusion of their names in the seniority list of appellant's cadre, the respondents have infringed the rights of the appellant. The appellant has sought to set aside the impugned seniority list to the extent of the names of Respondents No, 5 and 6. 3. The respondents were summoned in accordance with rules and Respondent No, 5 submitted his objections to appeal/written statement and preliminarily contended that:— (a) The appellant has no locus standi to file the instant appeal. (b) The appellant is an officer of NPS B-17, whereas Respondent No, 5 possesses NPS B-18, so the appellant is not authorized to challenge the seniority list of a senior grade and that the appellant does not fall within the definition of an aggrieved person. (c) At the time of institution of appeal, the appellant took a stand that he filed objections to the provisional seniority list issued by the department but the final seniority list was notified without considering the appellant's objection. The respondent claims that later on through an amendment application, the appellant has changed his plea and succeeded in getting his stance deleted. 4. On facts, the respondent claims that it is true that in the year 2001, two different functional units were constituted in the department of Animal Husbandry. However the department asked the officer for their options to get included in the functional units of their choice. Respondent No, 5 while taking benefit of option opted to be included in the functional unit of Extension, Research and Development. The option of Respondent No, 5 was positively answered and the impugned notification mentioning the seniority of the concerned officer was rightly issued in accordance with rules. Respondent No, 5 further averred that the educational qualification for inclusion in both the departments is DVM, so it is wrong to claim that the respondents were not eligible to be enlisted in the impugned notification. 5. The appellant did not file replication to the objections filed by the respondents. However official. Respondents No, 1 to 4 opted to own the stance of Respondents No, 5 and 6 by registering an endorsement through their Standing Counsel. 6. The parties to the appeal have filed written arguments which are a mere reiteration of the rival claims as per their pleadings. At the very outset, it is worth mentioning that Respondent No, 6 has died in the year 2005, so the appeal stands abetted to his extent. In order to dispose of this appeal, we have to keep in consideration that whether the respondent's name has wrongly been included in the impugned seniority list and whether the appellant is aggrieved by the impugned notification? 7. The appellant has consistently pleaded that Respondents No, 5 and 6 are not eligible to be included in the seniority list of the officers of the Department of Extension, Research and Development, Animal Husbandry. We could not find any reason advanced by the appellant to justify his claim. The official respondents as well as Respondent No, 5 claimed that basic qualification to be included in either department is Doctor of Veterinary Medicine (DVM). The appellant has impliedly admitted the version of the respondents by not filing a replication. Moreover, the appellant has not rebutted this version in his written arguments also. The stance of the appellant that the respondent was not eligible to be included in the impugned seniority list stands rebutted. The version of the respondent is further strengthened by a letter issued from the office of Director General of Animal Husbandry Department, wherein the officers under both the Directorates were asked to give their option once for all .as to which department they want to get included in. A format was also issued through a letter to the officers to send their data to the Director General Office. Respondent No, 5 opted to serve in the Department of Extension, Research and Development, 'so his name was rightly included in the seniority list prepared for the said department. 8. So far as the other point is concerned, the appellant could not give a detail as to how was he infringed by the impugned seniority list. The appellant has vaguely claimed that he is senior to Respondent No, 5, but did not file a detail in this regard. It is not clear from the contents of memorandum of appeal as well as the arguments filed by the appellant that on what serial number of the seniority list did he exist, so it is not clear from the pleadings of the appellant as to what benefit does the appellant get if the appeal is accepted? In the nutshell, the appellant does not fulfill the criteria of an aggrieved person in the present form of the pleadings. 9. For the foregoing reasons, the appeal being devoid of merit is dismissed with no order as to costs. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Azad Jammu and Kashmir Service Tribunal Judge(s): Azhar Saleem Babar, Muhammad Rashid Khan Title: Dr. BASHIR AHMED KHAWAJA, LIVESTOCK OFFICER, FARM L.D.R.C. AMBORE, MUZAFFARABAD vs AZAD GOVERNMENT OF THE STATE OF JAMMU & KASHMIR through its Chief Secretary and 5 others Case No.: Service Appeal No, 83 of 2005 Date of Judgment: 2008-02-01 Reported As: PLJ 2009 Tr.C. (Services) 216 Result: Appeal dismissed Judgment JUDGMENT Azhar Saleem Babar, Member. --The above titled appeal was instituted on 31.3.2005. It was admitted for regular hearing on 18.4.2005. The appellant has challenged the validity of seniority list dated 31.12.2004 through the instant appeal, whereby Respondents No, 5 and 6 have been enlisted in the department of Extension, Research and Development Animal Husbandry. 2. The facts making background of the above titled appeal are that the appellant is a regular employee of the Animal Husbandry Department possessing the education of DVM. M.Sc (Hons.) Poultry Husbandry. Seniority in different cadres of the department was common, when the Government was inclined to formulate departmental rules in the years 2000-2001 and two different functional units were constituted which were named as "Animal Health" and the department of "Extension, Research and Development". In furtherance thereto, two Directorates were constituted and seniority lists in two different functional units were also formulated. It has been contended on behalf of the appellant that the names of Respondents No, 5 and 6 were wrongly included in the Department of Extension, Research and Development. The appellant claims that Respondents No, 5 and 6 belong to the Animal Health Department, so the notification dated 31.12.2004 naming the respondents in the seniority list impugned are contrary to the law. The appellant has contended in para 3 of memorandum of appeal that Respondents No, 5 and 6 were appointed as Assistant Diseases Investigation Officer vide notification dated 21.7.1996 and the posts of incumbents were later on upgraded to NPS-18. The respondents were promoted against the posts of District Kotli and District Mirpur. Including different grounds for setting aside the impugned seniority list to the extent of Respondents No, 5 and 6, the appellant has further claimed that Respondents No, 5 and 6 do not qualify to be appointed in the Department of Extension, Research and Development rather they are qualified to be included in the department of Animal Health, so the impugned seniority list suffers from legal lacuna. The appellant further claims that Respondents No, 5 and 6 were junior to the appellant and by wrong inclusion of their names in the seniority list of appellant's cadre, the respondents have infringed the rights of the appellant. The appellant has sought to set aside the impugned seniority list to the extent of the names of Respondents No, 5 and 6. 3. The respondents were summoned in accordance with rules and Respondent No, 5 submitted his objections to appeal/written statement and preliminarily contended that:— (a) The appellant has no locus standi to file the instant appeal. (b) The appellant is an officer of NPS B-17, whereas Respondent No, 5 possesses NPS B-18, so the appellant is not authorized to challenge the seniority list of a senior grade and that the appellant does not fall within the definition of an aggrieved person. (c) At the time of institution of appeal, the appellant took a stand that he filed objections to the provisional seniority list issued by the department but the final seniority list was notified without considering the appellant's objection. The respondent claims that later on through an amendment application, the appellant has changed his plea and succeeded in getting his stance deleted. 4. On facts, the respondent claims that it is true that in the year 2001, two different functional units were constituted in the department of Animal Husbandry. However the department asked the officer for their options to get included in the functional units of their choice. Respondent No, 5 while taking benefit of option opted to be included in the functional unit of Extension, Research and Development. The option of Respondent No, 5 was positively answered and the impugned notification mentioning the seniority of the concerned officer was rightly issued in accordance with rules. Respondent No, 5 further averred that the educational qualification for inclusion in both the departments is DVM, so it is wrong to claim that the respondents were not eligible to be enlisted in the impugned notification. 5. The appellant did not file replication to the objections filed by the respondents. However official. Respondents No, 1 to 4 opted to own the stance of Respondents No, 5 and 6 by registering an endorsement through their Standing Counsel. 6. The parties to the appeal have filed written arguments which are a mere reiteration of the rival claims as per their pleadings. At the very outset, it is worth mentioning that Respondent No, 6 has died in the year 2005, so the appeal stands abetted to his extent. In order to dispose of this appeal, we have to keep in consideration that whether the respondent's name has wrongly been included in the impugned seniority list and whether the appellant is aggrieved by the impugned notification? 7. The appellant has consistently pleaded that Respondents No, 5 and 6 are not eligible to be included in the seniority list of the officers of the Department of Extension, Research and Development, Animal Husbandry. We could not find any reason advanced by the appellant to justify his claim. The official respondents as well as Respondent No, 5 claimed that basic qualification to be included in either department is Doctor of Veterinary Medicine (DVM). The appellant has impliedly admitted the version of the respondents by not filing a replication. Moreover, the appellant has not rebutted this version in his written arguments also. The stance of the appellant that the respondent was not eligible to be included in the impugned seniority list stands rebutted. The version of the respondent is further strengthened by a letter issued from the office of Director General of Animal Husbandry Department, wherein the officers under both the Directorates were asked to give their option once for all .as to which department they want to get included in. A format was also issued through a letter to the officers to send their data to the Director General Office. Respondent No, 5 opted to serve in the Department of Extension, Research and Development, 'so his name was rightly included in the seniority list prepared for the said department. 8. So far as the other point is concerned, the appellant could not give a detail as to how was he infringed by the impugned seniority list. The appellant has vaguely claimed that he is senior to Respondent No, 5, but did not file a detail in this regard. It is not clear from the contents of memorandum of appeal as well as the arguments filed by the appellant that on what serial number of the seniority list did he exist, so it is not clear from the pleadings of the appellant as to what benefit does the appellant get if the appeal is accepted? In the nutshell, the appellant does not fulfill the criteria of an aggrieved person in the present form of the pleadings. 9. For the foregoing reasons, the appeal being devoid of merit is dismissed with no order as to costs. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem