EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark FAZAL ILAHI vs Malik MUZAFFAR HUSSAIN Case No. 378 of 1974 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 3 Appeallant: FAZAL ILAHI Respondant: Malik MUZAFFAR HUSSAIN Result: N/A Judgment Date: 1975-11-06 Court: Administrative Tribunal Judges: Khalid Farooq Akbar Saad Saeed Jan Asfhaq Ali Khan Citations Advocates Statutes 1976 P L C [C.S.T.] 57 Judgment ORDER The appellant is posted as a teacher in the Government High School, Kakrali in District Gujrat. He challenged his order of transfer to Govern--ment High School, Kohar. On going through his memorandum of appeal we were struck by the fact that during the course of one calendar year he had been subject--ed to six transfers. This appeared rather unusual and we called for the District Education Officer to report the circumstances which had led to the frequent transfers of the appellant. The report has since been received and we have considered it. It appears that the appellant was formerly posted in the Province of Baluchistan from where he was transferred to the Punjab on his own request. On his transfer to the Punjab he was posted in the Government Middle School, Langhrial. On his own request he was again transferred from Langhrial to the Government High School, Kakrali. When he was in Kakrali three transfer orders were passed one after another. Thus, first he was transferred to Mona Depot, then to Sohawa Bulani and finally to Kohar. The transfer to Mona Depot and Sohawa Bulani were cancelled before they became effective; as such, they must be ignored. , The third transfer to Kohar, however, remains in force. The transfer of a Government servant from one place to another is a normal incident of his service. Unless a transfer is attendant by extraordinary circumstances, this Tribunal would not interfere with the discretion of the competent authority in this regard. The reason given by the District Education Officer for the transfer of the appellant from Kakrali to Kohar is plausible. Kakrali is the home village of the appellant. According to the report of the District Education Officer there were complaints about the appellant that he was indulging in local politics. The appellant conceded before us that Kakrali is mainly inhabited by members of his bradri. We are not prepared to dis-chair the averment of the District Education Officer in this regard. Consequently, the appellant's transfer to Kohar is not attended by any unusual circumstances. It may be pointed out that Kohar is only 40 miles away from Kakrali which is not much. For the reasons we do not think that this is a fit case for interfere--nce with the order of transfer. The appeal is without any merit and is hereby dismissed in limine. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Administrative Tribunal Judge(s): Khalid Farooq Akbar, Saad Saeed Jan, Asfhaq Ali Khan Title: FAZAL ILAHI vs Malik MUZAFFAR HUSSAIN Case No.: Case No. 378 of 1974 Date of Judgment: 1975-11-06 Reported As: 1976 P L C [C.S.T.] 57 Result: N/A Judgment ORDER The appellant is posted as a teacher in the Government High School, Kakrali in District Gujrat. He challenged his order of transfer to Govern--ment High School, Kohar. On going through his memorandum of appeal we were struck by the fact that during the course of one calendar year he had been subject--ed to six transfers. This appeared rather unusual and we called for the District Education Officer to report the circumstances which had led to the frequent transfers of the appellant. The report has since been received and we have considered it. It appears that the appellant was formerly posted in the Province of Baluchistan from where he was transferred to the Punjab on his own request. On his transfer to the Punjab he was posted in the Government Middle School, Langhrial. On his own request he was again transferred from Langhrial to the Government High School, Kakrali. When he was in Kakrali three transfer orders were passed one after another. Thus, first he was transferred to Mona Depot, then to Sohawa Bulani and finally to Kohar. The transfer to Mona Depot and Sohawa Bulani were cancelled before they became effective; as such, they must be ignored. , The third transfer to Kohar, however, remains in force. The transfer of a Government servant from one place to another is a normal incident of his service. Unless a transfer is attendant by extraordinary circumstances, this Tribunal would not interfere with the discretion of the competent authority in this regard. The reason given by the District Education Officer for the transfer of the appellant from Kakrali to Kohar is plausible. Kakrali is the home village of the appellant. According to the report of the District Education Officer there were complaints about the appellant that he was indulging in local politics. The appellant conceded before us that Kakrali is mainly inhabited by members of his bradri. We are not prepared to dis-chair the averment of the District Education Officer in this regard. Consequently, the appellant's transfer to Kohar is not attended by any unusual circumstances. It may be pointed out that Kohar is only 40 miles away from Kakrali which is not much. For the reasons we do not think that this is a fit case for interfere--nce with the order of transfer. The appeal is without any merit and is hereby dismissed in limine. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem