EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN through Secretary, Narcotics Control Division, Ministry of Interior and Narcotics Control, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad and another vs NOOR HUSSAIN PATHAN Civil Petition No, 625 of 1995 Appeal No, 73(R)/95 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN through Secretary, Narcotics Control Division, Ministry of Interior and Narcotics Control, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad and another Respondant: NOOR HUSSAIN PATHAN Result: Leave granted Judgment Date: 1996-04-10 Court: Supreme Court of Pakistan Judges: Sajjad Ali Shah Citations Advocates Statutes 1997 P L C (C.S.) 164 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' SAJJAD ALI SHAH, C.J.---Respondent Noor Hussain Pathan, Field Investigating Officer of Pakistan Narcotics Control Board, was dismissed from service on the charge that he aided and abetted in the escape of a smuggler who was in his custody. The Federal Service Tribunal allowed his appeal and in consequence reinstated him with back benefits. Feeling aggrieved, Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Narcotics Control Division, and the Chairman, Pakistan Narcotics Control Board, Rawalpindi have filed this petition seeking leave to file appeal against the decision of the Federal Service Tribunal. 2. Raja M Bashir, learned Deputy Attorney-General, submitted before-us that in respect of the charge mentioned above on three occasions in the past inquiry was held. In the first instance, the authorised officer did not agree with the finding of the enquiry officer and held that the inquiry was not properly conducted in the second instance, the enquiry officer gave finding to the effect that the respondent was not guilty and the same finding was given in the third report. It appears that the Federal Service Tribunal was impressed by this factor in coming to the conclusion it has. 3. Contention raised before us is that the Federal Service Tribunal has not gone through the entire record and particularly the statement of P.C. Zakir Hussain and the statement on oath of the respondent. Our attention is also drawn to the F.I.R. Filed by the respondent in which it is stated that Said Jamal was in his custody and escaped. It is further contended that the authorised officer has given cogent reasons to disagree with the third inquiry report and such reasons are stated in the show-cause notice issued to the respondent. 4. Leave is granted to consider as to whether the decision of the Federal Service Tribunal is sustainable in law and has been made after proper appraisement of the entire record. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Supreme Court of Pakistan Judge(s): Sajjad Ali Shah Title: FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN through Secretary, Narcotics Control Division, Ministry of Interior and Narcotics Control, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad and another vs NOOR HUSSAIN PATHAN Case No.: Civil Petition No, 625 of 1995 Appeal No, 73(R)/95 Date of Judgment: 1996-04-10 Reported As: 1997 P L C (C.S.) 164 Result: Leave granted Judgment ORDER ' SAJJAD ALI SHAH, C.J.---Respondent Noor Hussain Pathan, Field Investigating Officer of Pakistan Narcotics Control Board, was dismissed from service on the charge that he aided and abetted in the escape of a smuggler who was in his custody. The Federal Service Tribunal allowed his appeal and in consequence reinstated him with back benefits. Feeling aggrieved, Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Narcotics Control Division, and the Chairman, Pakistan Narcotics Control Board, Rawalpindi have filed this petition seeking leave to file appeal against the decision of the Federal Service Tribunal. 2. Raja M Bashir, learned Deputy Attorney-General, submitted before-us that in respect of the charge mentioned above on three occasions in the past inquiry was held. In the first instance, the authorised officer did not agree with the finding of the enquiry officer and held that the inquiry was not properly conducted in the second instance, the enquiry officer gave finding to the effect that the respondent was not guilty and the same finding was given in the third report. It appears that the Federal Service Tribunal was impressed by this factor in coming to the conclusion it has. 3. Contention raised before us is that the Federal Service Tribunal has not gone through the entire record and particularly the statement of P.C. Zakir Hussain and the statement on oath of the respondent. Our attention is also drawn to the F.I.R. Filed by the respondent in which it is stated that Said Jamal was in his custody and escaped. It is further contended that the authorised officer has given cogent reasons to disagree with the third inquiry report and such reasons are stated in the show-cause notice issued to the respondent. 4. Leave is granted to consider as to whether the decision of the Federal Service Tribunal is sustainable in law and has been made after proper appraisement of the entire record. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-14 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem