EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark FULL BENCH Sardar KARIM HAYAT vs S. AHMAD NAWAZ SHAH Not Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 3 Appeallant: FULL BENCH Sardar KARIM HAYAT Respondant: S. AHMAD NAWAZ SHAH Result: order made Judgment Date: 1953-10-14 Court: Baghdad-ul-Jadid Judges: Abdul Hameed Sheikh Abdul Rashid Faiz Muhammad Citations Advocates Statutes P L D 1953 Baghdad-ul-Jadid 59 Judgment ORDER OF REFERENCE FAIZ MUHAMMAD, C. J .-This is a petition for revision under section 435 of Cr. P. C. It is directed against the order of Magistrate First Class, Sadiqabad who apprehending a breach of peace between the parties about the possession of a Factory known as Dhanpat Mal Diwan Chand Factory, Sadiqabad proceeded under section 145 of the Code and issued notice to them to attend his Court and to put in written statements of their res--pective claims as respects the fact of actual possession of the subject of dispute. The Magistrate took action in the matter on the application of S. Ahmad Nawaz Shah respondent and on the report of the Inspector of Police to whom the application had been forwarded for inquiry. Simultaneously with the issuing of the notice the Magistrate also attached the factory in dispute under proviso 2 of subsection 4 of section 145, Cr. P. C. On the petition coming up for hearing before me on 29th September 1953 Mr. Nisar Ahmad counsel for the respondent raised a preliminary objection to the effect that the High Court of Judicature at Baghdad-ul-Jadid Bahawalpur State was not properly constituted and therefore had no jurisdiction to try this revision petition. In the course of his arguments on the prelimi--nary point he referred me to sections 2, 11, 12, 16 and 50 of the Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act of 1952. His contention briefly is that after the coming into force of the said Act a new High Court should have been established for the State as requir--ed by its section 50. He also contended that a Notification or an Announcement by Alahazrat the Amir Ruler Bahadur declaring the existing High Court as the High Court under section 50 of the Act was the least that should have been done to invest the High Court of Baghdad-ul-Jadid with the powers of High Court within the meaning of section 50 of the said Act. While making this submission he has referred to sections 200 and 219 of the Government of India Act, 1935 as adopted for Pakistan. His reference to sections 11, 12 and 16 of the Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act is intended merely to show that the phraseology employed in these sections is analogous to the phraseology of section 50 of the same Act. Mr. Farzand Ali counsel for the petitioner urged that Mr. Nisar Ahmad had not been able to substantiate the objection raised and that arguments advanced by him were fallacious. He also contended that the objection had been raised merely to delay the disposal of this petition. The objection raised by Mr. Nisar Ahmad relates to the interpretation of certain provisions of the Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act of 1952, in particular sections thereof to which reference has been already made. The decision of the question, if it goes in favour of Mr. Nisar Ahmad, will have far reaching consequences. Therefore I consider it necessary that the matter should be taken up by the Full Bench of this Court. Accordingly I refer it to the Full Bench. The specific question which the Full Bench will have to decide will be:---- "Whether the High Court of Baghdad-ul-Jadid at Bahawalpur can be held to be the High Court as contemplated by section 50 of the Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act of 1952 and if it cannot be so held what is its effect". With the agreement of the parties the case will be taken up by the Full Bench on 11th October 1953. All other cases find for hearing on that date will be adjourned to other dates so that this revision petition may be disposed of as early as possible. FULL BENCH DECISION ON PRELIMINARY OBJECTION FAIZ MUHAMMAD, C. J .-In the criminal revision S. Karim Hayat v. Syed Ahmad Nawaz Shah, Sh. Nisar Ahmad counsel for the respondent raised a preliminary objection to the effect that the High Court of Judicature at Baghdad-ul-Jadid in Bahawalpur State was not properly constituted and therefore had no jurisdic--tion to hear the petition. As the objection raised necessitated interpretation of certain provisions of the Government of Bahawal--pur Interim Constitution Act of 1952, the Chief Justice before whom the revision came up for hearing referred the matter to the Full Bench of the Court. The specific question which the full Bench has been required to answer is as follows :- "Whether the High Court of Baghdad-ul-Jadid at Bahawalpur can be held to be the High Court as contemplated by section 50 of the Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act of 1952 and if it cannot be so held what is its effect." The Full Bench consisting of all the three Judges of this High Court met on 11th October 1953 to consider the question. Messrs Mahmood Khan and Farzand Ali Advocates represented the petitioner Karim flayat while Messrs Nisar Ahmad and Abdur Rahman represented the respondent Syed Ahmad Nawaz Shah. The Full Bench also heard the Government Advocate to ascertain the view-point of the State Government on the question. Mr. Nisar Ahmad repeated the 'arguments, which he had advanced before the Chief Justice and which are set out in the order of reference. Of course when arguing the point before the Full Bench, Mr. Nisar Ahmad amplified what he had said before. He started by referring to section 2 of the Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act, 1952. The section in question runs as follows :----- "All provisions, Enactments and Rules having the force of law which provide for or relate to the Government of Bahawal--pur shall be deemed to have been repealed and abrogated to the extent of their repugnancy to the provisions of this Act." It is obvious that this section provides for the repeal and abrogation of previous enactments and rules having the force of law relating to the Government of Bahawalpur not in their entirety but to the extent of their repugnancy to any provision of the Act of 1952. Mr. Nisar Ahmad contended that this section of the Act had the effect of abrogating the Government of Bahawalpur Act of 1949 and the Constitution of High Court Act of 1937. When asked to point out the provisions of the two latter enactments which in his opinion were repugnant to the provisions of the Act of 1952, Mr. Nisar Ahmad could not give a satisfactory reply. We have examined the provisions of the Government of Bahawalpur Act, 1949 and the Bahawalpur High Court Constitution Act of 1937 and do not find anything in them which can be said to be repugnant to the provisions of 1952 Act as far as the High Court is concerned. The 1949 Act contains no reference whatsoever to the Judiciary or the High Court of the State. The obvious reason for this omission appears to be that the enacting authority of that Act accepted the existence of the High Court of Judicature at Baghdad-ut-Jadid as an accomplished fact by virtue of the High Court Constitution Act enacted by Alahazrat the Amir Ruler Bahadur of the State in 1937. As stated above Mr. Nisar Ahmad was not able to say which provision of the Constitution of High Court Act, 1937 was repugnant to the provisions of the Interim Constitution Act of 1952. A word about the nature and the source from which the Constitution of the High Court Act emanated is however necessary to clarify the position. Constitutionalism in the sense of adherence to certain find and well defined principles for the governance of the State is of a very recent growth in Bahawalpur. Few if any talked of the Constitution of the State in its ordinarily accepted sense before the partition of this sub-continent. As far as we know previous to the passing of the Government of Bahawalpur Act of 1949 Alahazrat the Amir Ruler Bahadur of Bahawalpur was the sole Legislative Authority in the State. It was by virtue of powers vesting in him as such that Alahazrat the Amir passed an Act in 1937 whereby the then Chief Court which had no written Constitution was raised to the status of a High Court. We have advisedly called the Constitution of High Court at Baghdad-ul-Jadid as an Act or enactment of the Alahazrat. Although modelled on the lines of the Letters Patent of the Lahore High Court it is different in its character from the said Letters Patent. This will be evident from the following words in the opening paragraph of the Con. Stitution of the High Court. .... We do hereby enact and establish in the Bahawal--put-State with effect from fifteenth day of September, one thousand nine hundred and thirty seven corresponding to the 9th day of Rajabul Murajjab 1356 a High Court which shall be called the High Court of Judicature at Baghdad-ul-Jadid Bahawalpur State, and we do hereby constitute the said Court to be a Court of Record." The above words leave no doubt in our mind that the Con--stitution of the High Court of Judicature at Baghdad-ul-Jadid embodies an act of the then sole legislative authority i.e. The Amir Ruler Bahadur of the State and as such has been since its being passed accepted as an enactment having the force of law. Proceeding further in his argument Mr. Nisar Ahmad referred to subsection (2) of section 3 of the 1952 Act. Subsection 1 of this section defines certain expressions. Subsection 2 of it lays down that in this Act unless context otherwise requires other expressions defined in the Constitution Act (Government of India Act of 1935 as adopted for Pakistan) shall have meanings assigned to them in the said Act. The expression "High Court" is not defined in subsection (1) of section 3 of the 1952 Act. Therefore Mr. Nisar Ahmad wants us to hold that omission to define the expression "High Court" in the State Interim Constitution Act, 1952 renders the provision contained in section 50 of the Act regarding the existence or establishment of a High Court for the State infructuous. He contends that provision should have been made in it on the lines of section 219 subsection (1) of the Government of India Act, 1935 as adopted for Pakistan. The position taken up by him is that this section i. e., section 219, contains definition of the expression "High Court" but it and section 311 of the said Act cannot be invoked for the definition of the expression "High Court" for purposes of section 50 of the Bahawalpur Act of 1952. While we agree with him that provision of section 219 (1) and section 311 of the Government of India Act 1935 as adopted for Pakistan cannot be invoked for purposes of section 50 of Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act, 1952 we do not see eye to eye with him as far as his contention relating to the necessity of a provision in it on the lines of section 219 (1) referred to above is concerned. A reference to section 219 (1) will show that it does not contain a definition properly so-called of the expression High Court. What the section does is that it gives the names of certain Courts which are to be deemed as High Courts for the purposes of Government of India Act, 1935 as adopted for Pakistan. Two of the Courts so named are described as High Courts i. e., the High Court at Lahore and the High Court of East Bengal while the other two are not so described. The Court exercising the powers of High Court in Sind is described as the Chief Court, while the Court exercising the same powers in the N. W. F. P. Is described as the Judicial Commissioner's Court. In order to avoid confusion about the meaning of expression High Court for the purposes of Government of India Act, 1935 as adopted for Pakistan section 219 was incorporated in that Act. The idea underlining it is that the Courts mentioned in that section whether described as High Court or otherwise shall be deemed to be High Courts for purposes of that Act. There does not exist any possibility of a confusion of this kind arising as far as the High Court in Bahawalpur State is concerned. There is only one High Court in the State and it is described as High Court. Therefore there was no necessity for making a provision in the Bahawalpur Constitution Act, 1952 on the lines of section 219 sub--section (1) of the Government of India Act, 1935 as adopted for Pakistan. Mr. Nisar Ahmad next took up section 50 itself and urged that as it stands it required the establishment of a new High Court for the State after the coming into force of the 1952 Act. Section 50 runs as follows:- "There shall be a High Court of Judicature for the State." Mr. Nisar Ahmad's argument in this connection is that since the provision of this section is mandatory therefore a new High Court should have been established in the State and that the existing High Court must be held to have ceased to function. Amplifying his arguments further he said that the section should be read as requiring that on the coming into force of the Act of 1952 a new High Court of Judicature shall be established for the State. We see no warrant for reading the additional words suggested by Mr. Nisar Ahmad into the section. It is true that the provision of this section is mandatory but it does not require that if a High Court existed at the time when the Act came into force it was to B be abolished or automatically ceased to function and a new one established in its place. We are of the view that the existing High Court amply satisfies the mandatory provision of section 50 With a view further to strengthen his arguments Mr. Nisar Ahmad referred to a number of sections of the Act in which the word "there shall be" are used. For instance section 11 (1) of the Act which provides that there shall be a Council of Ministers to aid and advise the Ruler,------------.The counsel contended that a new Council of Ministers was appointed after the coming into force of the Act. This argument appears to be based on the erroneous assumption that a Council of Ministers existed before the coming into force of the Act of 1952 and that the function of such Council of Ministers was to aid and advise the Ruler. No Council of Ministers for aiding and advising Alahazrat the Ruler in the exercise of his functions existed before the coming into force of 1952 Act. Similarly Mr. Nisar Ahmad's reference to sections 16 and 17 of the Act is not of any avail to him because the State Legislature of the kind envisaged in the former section and the Legislative Assembly of the description referred to in the latter section did not exist before the coming into force of the 1952 Act. The learned counsel also referred to section 200 of the Government of India Act, 1935 as adopted for Pakistan to which it is provided that there shall be a Federal Court in Pakistan. He contends that after the coming into being of Pakistan the Federal Court was established for it. This is so, but no Federal Court existed in Pakistan after partition and therefore a new Court answering the description given in sec--tion 200 had to be established. Mr. Nisar Ahmad laid a great stress on the absence of a definition of the expression High Court in the 1952 Act. He strenuously contended that in the absence of such a definition it is difficult to hold that the High Court of Judicature at Baghdad-ul---Jadid is the High Court as contemplated by section 50 of the 195 Act. We are not prepared to accept this argument of his either. In the first place the definition of High Court is given in the General Clauses Act for purpose of civil cases and in the Code of Criminal Procedure for criminal cases. According to these Acts which are in force in the State "High Court" means the highest. Court of civil and criminal appeals or revisions in any local area It is a well recognised principle of Interpretation of Statutes that Legislature must be presumed to be aware of the meaning of an expression defined or used in a former Statute and should be held to have used it in the same sense in a latter Statute. The Legislature which extended the application of General Clauses Act and the Code of Criminal Procedure to the State being the same as passed the Constitution of the High Court Act in 1937 and the Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act of 1952, it must be presumed that the expression "High Court" in the latter two enactments is used in the same sense and meaning as in the former two. This interpretation is in accord with the principle of beneficial construction which requires the J edges to make such construction as suppresses the mischief and advances the remedy. Mr. Nisar Ahmad's arguments in this behalf must therefore also fail. The counsel also referred to Article 214 (1) of the Constitution of India. This article also opens with the words there shall be, Mr. Nisar Ahmad contends that part 2 of the article gives the definition of the expression `'High Court" for purposes of the Constitution. This is however not the case. The object of enacting part 2 is made clear by its concluding words. The expression "Province" having been replaced in the Constitution by the expression "State" it was considered necessary to provide that High Courts functioning in areas formerly described as Provinces will be deemed to be High Courts for corresponding areas now described as States. "Notwithstanding the repeal of the Government of Bahawal--per Act, 1949, all the laws, rules or regulations having the force i; of law in force in the State immediately before the commence--ment of this Act shall continue in force in the State until altered or repealed or amended by tire Mate Legislature or other competent authority." The only other point which requires consideration before we finally dispose of this reference relates to the personnel of the present Judges of the High Court and not to its Constitution pro--perly so-called. This point was not formally raised by either party but informally suggested to us by both. Two of the Judges of this Court were appointed before the coming into force of the Interim Constitution Act of 1952. Therefore they took the oath of office as provided for in Constitution of the High Court Act of 1937. This oath was different from the oath of office pre--scribed in Schedule I of the Interim Constitution Act of 1552. The question which requires being looked into is the effect of the failure of the two Judges concerned to have taken the newly pre--scribed oath. The law as it stands requires that the Judges shall take the prescribed oath after their appointment and previous to their entering upon their duties. Both the Judges were appointed and entered upon their duties before the coming into force of 1952 Act, and duly took the oath then prescribed. The question whether it was or was not necessary for them to take the newly prescribed oath, important as it is, does not in my opinion have the effect of invalidating the Constitution of the High Court. The utmost that) can be said is that the High Court of Judicature at Baghdad-ul---Jadid is the High Court constituted under the High Court Consti--tution Act of 1937. We have already held above that this Act had the force of law when the Interim Constitution Act, 1952 came into force and therefore remains in force till it is altered, repealed or amended by a competent authority. However to put the matter beyond the pale of controversy we humbly suggest that Alahazrat the Amir Ruler may be pleased to order that arrangements may be made to enable the two Judges concerned to take the newly pre--scribed oath under section 51 (3) of the Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act of 1952. FINAL ORDER IN THE REVISION PETITION. FAIZ MUHAMMAD, C. J .-On a preliminary objection being raised by counsel for the respondent as to the validity of the Cons--titution of this High Court and hence to it 7, competence to hear the petition I referred the point to the Full Bench of this Court for decision. For my reasons to refer the matter to the Full Bench and the specific question so referred my order dated the 30th of September 1953, may be perused. The Full Bench consisting of all the three Judges of this Court has held that High Court of Judicature at Baghdad-ul-Jadid as at present functioning in the State is a validly and properly constituted High Court under section 50 of the Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act of 1952, and also otherwise. For detailed reasons on which the Full Bench has based its decision reference may be made to its order dated 14th October 1953. At the resumed hearing of the revision petition before me Mr. Farzand Ali and Sh. Abdur Rehman Advocate appeared for Mr. Karim Hayat petitioner and S. Ahmad Nawaz Shah respondent respectively. Before Mr. Farzand Ali could begin his arguments Sh. Abdur Rahman raised another preliminary objection to the effect that the High Court should not have entertained this revision petition until after the petitioner had first moved the Sessions Judge or the District Magistrate or the Additional District Magistrate concerned, and failed to obtain redress for his grievance if any. It is true that according to the general practice of almost all the High Courts in this sub-continent the petitioners are required to move the one or the other of the lower Courts of revision in the first instance. But powers of revision vesting in the High Court and such other Courts under section 435, Cr. P. C are concurrent and, therefore, in the special circumstances of a particular case the High Court is not precluded from entertaining a petition directly. In the present case reasons for which I entertained this revision petition directly are firstly that the Sessions Judge at Rahimyar Khan was away on recess and the petitioner had made some allegations against the District Magistrate and secondly the petition involved the consideration of the provisions of a Federal Enactment i.e., the Evacuee Property Ordinance of 1949. I felt that I would be in a better position to appreciate the arguments of the parties on the point.Therefore ruling out Sh. Abdul Rahman's objection I called upon Mr. Farzand Ali to argue his petition. On 16th of September last S. Ahmad Nawaz Shah respondent made an application to the Magistrate, 1st Class, Sadiqabad in which among other things he alleged that he and Mr. Karim Hayat petitioner along with some others were allottees of the evacuee property (a ginning factory) known as the Dhanpat Mal Diwan Cband Factory at Sadiqabad. According to S. Ahmad Nawaz Shah the factory in question had been allotted to him and others including the petitioner for three years commencing with 1952. He further averred that the allottees peacefully worked the factory during the last cotton season but with the beginning of the present season Mr. Karim Hayat showed signs of trying to take exclusive possession of it and to remove the stock-in---trade, tools and parts etc. Lying on the premises. This according to S. Ahmad Nawaz Shah meant undue interference with his right as the managing allottee. He further alleged that on the day on which he made the application to the Court i.e. 16th September 1953, Mr. Karim Hayat petitioner had threatened him with violence and even murder if he dared to enter the factory. On the basis of these allegations Mr. Ahmad Nawaz Shah said that he apprehended a breach of peace and therefore prayed the Court for action under section 145, Cr. P. C. On receiving Mr. Ahmad Nawaz Shah's application the Magistrate, Sadiqabad recorded his statement and forwarded a copy of the application to the Inspector of Police, Sadiqabad with the order that the Inspector should immediately proceed to the spot find after making necessary enquiry report within three hours as to how matters stood. Accordingly the Inspector proceeded to the spot and after recording the statement of S. Ahmad Nawaz Shah and three other witnesses reported that there was an imminent danger of breach of peace. On receiving the Inspector's report along with the statements of witnesses he had recorded the Magistrate issued a notice to the parties to appear before him on 24th of September 1953, and put in written statements of their respective claims as respects the fact of actual possession of the subject of dispute. Simultaneously with this order the Magistrate also proceeded under proviso 2 of subsection (4) of section 145, Cr. P. C. And ordered the attachment of factory in dispute along with all the stock-in-trade etc. Lying on the premises. In pursuance of this order the Inspector attached the factory and sealed it. On receiving notice referred to above Mr. Karim Hayat find the present revision petition in this Court against the Magistrate's order. (1) That there was no apprehension of breach of peace and therefore the order of the Magistrate was without jurisdiction. (2) That control or possession of the parties over the factory was joint and therefore section 145, Cr. P. C. Did not apply. (3) That Mr. Karim Hayat and not S. Ahmad Nawaz Shah was the Managing Allottee of the factory and therefore he was entitled to its possession for the purposes of management. (4) That the property in dispute is not properly described in the notice issued to the petitioner. (5) That copy of the notice was not published as required by subsection (3) of section 145, Cr. P. C. and (6) That the factory in dispute being evacuee property could not be attached. I will deal with points raised by Mr. Farzand Ali one by one in the above order. 1. It is true that the existence of apprehension of breach of peace alone gives the Magistrate in-jurisdiction to proceed under section 145. The question which requires consideration however is as to who is to judge whether such an apprehension exists or not. Section 145, Cr. P. C. Provides for the satisfaction of the Magistrate in this behalf. It is therefore doubtful if the High Court while dealing with a case on the revision side can go into the matter. Subsection (5) provides that the order of the Magistrate under subsection (1) shall be final unless it is set aside by himself. I have carefully gone through the record of the Magistrate's Court and have come to the conclusion that as it stands it does show that a breach of peace was imminent. This may be due to the fact that instead of appearing before the Magis--trate and putting in written statement of his claim as respects the fact of actual possession and also about other matters Mr. Karim Hayat rushed to this Court. It is possible that if he had before coming to this Court appeared before the Magistrate and apprised him of the true situation he the Magistrate may have cancelled his order under subsection (5) of section 145, Cr. P. C. In these circumstances I am constrained to hold that the Magistrate did not act without jurisdiction as far as this point is concerned. There is however something in the Magistrate's order which makes me feel that he did not take as detached a view of the matter as he should have taken. While I hold that cases of apprehended breach of peace should be dealt with promptly I cannot help remarking that promptness does not necessarily mean a hasty action. After receiving the application and recording the applicant's statement the Magistrate ordered the Inspector of Police to make enquiry on the spot and report within three hours. This is something more than promptness. In my opinion it borders on undue haste. Probably it is this which made Mr. Karim Hayat doubt the impartiality of the Magistrate and compelled him to rush to the High Court. Coming to the second point raised by Mr. Farzand Ali I may point out that it is common ground between the parties that they along with others are joint allottees of the property in dispute. Their possession of it must therefore be presumed to be joint. Unfortunately however Mr. Karim Hayat on one hand and Syed Ahmad Nawaz Shah on the other claims that he is the managing allottee and as such entitled to exclusive possession of the property for purposes of its management. So although ordinarily section 145, Cr. P. C. Does not apply to cases of joint possession, in the present case however it would have applied but for reasons given below in connection with Mr. Farzand Ali's sixth objection. The real object of section 145 is to prevent a dispute about immovable property, for such disputes generally lead to breach of peace. A dispute is as likely to exist about a jointly possessed immovable property as about an exclusively possessed one. As regards Mr. Farzand Ali's third point i.e. That Mr. Karim Hayat and not S. Ahmad Nawaz Shah was the managing allottee of the factory and therefore the former was entitled to its possession, all I can say is that this is a question of fact and it is neither proper nor possible for me to go into it at this stage. Mr. Farzand Ali's fourth and fifth points relate to notice to Mr. Karim Hayat and the publication of the same under subsection (3) of section 145. I have no hesitation in holding that the property in dispute is not properly described in the notice issued to Mr. Karim Hayat. The question however which requires consideration is whether or not the omission occasioned any miscarriage of Justice. In other words can it be said that Mr. Karim Hayat was in any manner misled into believing that the notice related to some factory other than the one in dispute I am sure that Mr. Karim Hayat was not at all misled about the identity of the property in dispute. The defect in notice can--not therefore be viewed otherwise than an irregularity. As regards the publication of notice I may remark that the provision relating to it as contained in subsection (3) of section 145, Cr. P. C. Is mandatory. It has been held in a number of rulings of various High Courts that non-compliance with it has the effect of invalidating the proceedings. Looking upon the notice itself and taking into consideration the fact that it was not pro--perly published I am further convinced that the Magistrate acted with undue haste. The sixth point raised by Mr. Farzand Ali is in my opinion very important and requires more serious consideration. He contended before me that an Evacuee Property is not liable to attachment by the order of any Court, officer or authority. In support of his contention he referred to sections 4 and 12 of The Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Ordinance of 1949. The two sections run as follows :- Section 4.-The provisions of this Ordinance, and any rule or order made thereunder, shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent herewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, or in any instrument having effect by virtue of such law. Section 12.-Property which has vested in, or of which possession has been taken by, the Custodian shall be exempt from all legal process, including seizure, distress, ejectment, attachment or sale by any officer of a Court, and no injunction or other order of whatever kind in respect of such property shall be granted or made by any Court. Section 4 above overrides all other laws by providing that the provisions of this Ordinance shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent with it in any other law for the time being in force. Section 12 exempts evacuee property from legal process including attachment thereof by any officer of Court or arty other authority. The words "or any other authority" were inserted by the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) (Amendment) Act of 1951. It will be noted that section 12 as it stands is very wide in its application. The words officer of a Court or any other authority include a Criminal Court or any other authority con--cerned with prevention and punishment of crime. On behalf of the respondent S. Ahmad Nawaz Shah, Sh. Abdur Rahman, Advocate contended that the words "officer of a Court" and "or any other authority" occurring in section 12 refer to the officer of a Civil or Revenue Court and a Civil or Revenue Authority and not to an officer of a Criminal Court or an authority concerned with prevention and punishment of crime. In support of his contention he has urged before me that the object of attachment under civil process is different from the object of attachment under section 145 which provides for prevention of breach of peace. I agree with him that there is a difference between the two kinds of attachment. But this by itself is no ground for holding that the word attachment as used in section 12 of the Ordinance referred to above applies only to an attachment ordered by a Civil or Revenue Court or Authority. Sh. Abdur Rahman next invited my attention to section 34 of the Ordinance in which the words used are "Civil or Revenue Courts." I have read and re-read this section and come to the conclusion that it does not help Sh. Abdur Rahman. Section 34 as it stands bars the jurisdiction of Civil and Revenue Courts in matters which are specified in it. The use of the words Civil or Revenue Court in this section far from helping Sh. Abdur Rahman actually lends support to the contention of Mr. Farzand Ali. If the Legislature had intended that an evacuee property would not be liable to attachment by officer of a Civil or Revenue Court only it would have said so in section 12. The language of subsection (1) of section 12 as it stands is unambiguous and all-embracing. Sh. Abdur Rahman was unable to produce before me any authority in support of his contention touching upon the interpretation of subsection (1) of section 12. In the absence of any authority on the point it is not possible for me to ignore the plain meanings of the section and read into it words which the Legislature did not consider proper to employ. Some if not all the forms of process mentioned in section 12 (1) can be issued by Criminal, Civil and Revenue Courts or Authorities Attach--ment is one such process. In the absence of a clear indication to the contrary I have no alternative but to hold that exemption of evacuee property from legal process applies to the process of all the Courts and authorities alike. As a last resort Sh. Abdur Rahman challenged the validity of the Evacuee Property Ordinance itself as far as its application to the State is concerned. He urged that Central Legislature or the Governor-General has no power to legislate about evacuee property in the State. This contention of Sh. Abdur Rahman is not tenable either. In the first place subsection (3) of section I of the Ordinance extends its application to acceding States, Apart from this the application of the Ordinance was also extend--ed to the Stata by the State Government Notification No. 104 L. D. Dated the 8th of November 1949. A. H.Attachment set aside. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Baghdad-ul-Jadid Judge(s): Abdul Hameed, Sheikh Abdul Rashid, Faiz Muhammad Title: FULL BENCH Sardar KARIM HAYAT vs S. AHMAD NAWAZ SHAH Case No.: Not Date of Judgment: 1953-10-14 Reported As: P L D 1953 Baghdad-ul-Jadid 59 Result: order made Judgment ORDER OF REFERENCE FAIZ MUHAMMAD, C. J .-This is a petition for revision under section 435 of Cr. P. C. It is directed against the order of Magistrate First Class, Sadiqabad who apprehending a breach of peace between the parties about the possession of a Factory known as Dhanpat Mal Diwan Chand Factory, Sadiqabad proceeded under section 145 of the Code and issued notice to them to attend his Court and to put in written statements of their res--pective claims as respects the fact of actual possession of the subject of dispute. The Magistrate took action in the matter on the application of S. Ahmad Nawaz Shah respondent and on the report of the Inspector of Police to whom the application had been forwarded for inquiry. Simultaneously with the issuing of the notice the Magistrate also attached the factory in dispute under proviso 2 of subsection 4 of section 145, Cr. P. C. On the petition coming up for hearing before me on 29th September 1953 Mr. Nisar Ahmad counsel for the respondent raised a preliminary objection to the effect that the High Court of Judicature at Baghdad-ul-Jadid Bahawalpur State was not properly constituted and therefore had no jurisdiction to try this revision petition. In the course of his arguments on the prelimi--nary point he referred me to sections 2, 11, 12, 16 and 50 of the Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act of 1952. His contention briefly is that after the coming into force of the said Act a new High Court should have been established for the State as requir--ed by its section 50. He also contended that a Notification or an Announcement by Alahazrat the Amir Ruler Bahadur declaring the existing High Court as the High Court under section 50 of the Act was the least that should have been done to invest the High Court of Baghdad-ul-Jadid with the powers of High Court within the meaning of section 50 of the said Act. While making this submission he has referred to sections 200 and 219 of the Government of India Act, 1935 as adopted for Pakistan. His reference to sections 11, 12 and 16 of the Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act is intended merely to show that the phraseology employed in these sections is analogous to the phraseology of section 50 of the same Act. Mr. Farzand Ali counsel for the petitioner urged that Mr. Nisar Ahmad had not been able to substantiate the objection raised and that arguments advanced by him were fallacious. He also contended that the objection had been raised merely to delay the disposal of this petition. The objection raised by Mr. Nisar Ahmad relates to the interpretation of certain provisions of the Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act of 1952, in particular sections thereof to which reference has been already made. The decision of the question, if it goes in favour of Mr. Nisar Ahmad, will have far reaching consequences. Therefore I consider it necessary that the matter should be taken up by the Full Bench of this Court. Accordingly I refer it to the Full Bench. The specific question which the Full Bench will have to decide will be:---- "Whether the High Court of Baghdad-ul-Jadid at Bahawalpur can be held to be the High Court as contemplated by section 50 of the Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act of 1952 and if it cannot be so held what is its effect". With the agreement of the parties the case will be taken up by the Full Bench on 11th October 1953. All other cases find for hearing on that date will be adjourned to other dates so that this revision petition may be disposed of as early as possible. FULL BENCH DECISION ON PRELIMINARY OBJECTION FAIZ MUHAMMAD, C. J .-In the criminal revision S. Karim Hayat v. Syed Ahmad Nawaz Shah, Sh. Nisar Ahmad counsel for the respondent raised a preliminary objection to the effect that the High Court of Judicature at Baghdad-ul-Jadid in Bahawalpur State was not properly constituted and therefore had no jurisdic--tion to hear the petition. As the objection raised necessitated interpretation of certain provisions of the Government of Bahawal--pur Interim Constitution Act of 1952, the Chief Justice before whom the revision came up for hearing referred the matter to the Full Bench of the Court. The specific question which the full Bench has been required to answer is as follows :- "Whether the High Court of Baghdad-ul-Jadid at Bahawalpur can be held to be the High Court as contemplated by section 50 of the Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act of 1952 and if it cannot be so held what is its effect." The Full Bench consisting of all the three Judges of this High Court met on 11th October 1953 to consider the question. Messrs Mahmood Khan and Farzand Ali Advocates represented the petitioner Karim flayat while Messrs Nisar Ahmad and Abdur Rahman represented the respondent Syed Ahmad Nawaz Shah. The Full Bench also heard the Government Advocate to ascertain the view-point of the State Government on the question. Mr. Nisar Ahmad repeated the 'arguments, which he had advanced before the Chief Justice and which are set out in the order of reference. Of course when arguing the point before the Full Bench, Mr. Nisar Ahmad amplified what he had said before. He started by referring to section 2 of the Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act, 1952. The section in question runs as follows :----- "All provisions, Enactments and Rules having the force of law which provide for or relate to the Government of Bahawal--pur shall be deemed to have been repealed and abrogated to the extent of their repugnancy to the provisions of this Act." It is obvious that this section provides for the repeal and abrogation of previous enactments and rules having the force of law relating to the Government of Bahawalpur not in their entirety but to the extent of their repugnancy to any provision of the Act of 1952. Mr. Nisar Ahmad contended that this section of the Act had the effect of abrogating the Government of Bahawalpur Act of 1949 and the Constitution of High Court Act of 1937. When asked to point out the provisions of the two latter enactments which in his opinion were repugnant to the provisions of the Act of 1952, Mr. Nisar Ahmad could not give a satisfactory reply. We have examined the provisions of the Government of Bahawalpur Act, 1949 and the Bahawalpur High Court Constitution Act of 1937 and do not find anything in them which can be said to be repugnant to the provisions of 1952 Act as far as the High Court is concerned. The 1949 Act contains no reference whatsoever to the Judiciary or the High Court of the State. The obvious reason for this omission appears to be that the enacting authority of that Act accepted the existence of the High Court of Judicature at Baghdad-ut-Jadid as an accomplished fact by virtue of the High Court Constitution Act enacted by Alahazrat the Amir Ruler Bahadur of the State in 1937. As stated above Mr. Nisar Ahmad was not able to say which provision of the Constitution of High Court Act, 1937 was repugnant to the provisions of the Interim Constitution Act of 1952. A word about the nature and the source from which the Constitution of the High Court Act emanated is however necessary to clarify the position. Constitutionalism in the sense of adherence to certain find and well defined principles for the governance of the State is of a very recent growth in Bahawalpur. Few if any talked of the Constitution of the State in its ordinarily accepted sense before the partition of this sub-continent. As far as we know previous to the passing of the Government of Bahawalpur Act of 1949 Alahazrat the Amir Ruler Bahadur of Bahawalpur was the sole Legislative Authority in the State. It was by virtue of powers vesting in him as such that Alahazrat the Amir passed an Act in 1937 whereby the then Chief Court which had no written Constitution was raised to the status of a High Court. We have advisedly called the Constitution of High Court at Baghdad-ul-Jadid as an Act or enactment of the Alahazrat. Although modelled on the lines of the Letters Patent of the Lahore High Court it is different in its character from the said Letters Patent. This will be evident from the following words in the opening paragraph of the Con. Stitution of the High Court. .... We do hereby enact and establish in the Bahawal--put-State with effect from fifteenth day of September, one thousand nine hundred and thirty seven corresponding to the 9th day of Rajabul Murajjab 1356 a High Court which shall be called the High Court of Judicature at Baghdad-ul-Jadid Bahawalpur State, and we do hereby constitute the said Court to be a Court of Record." The above words leave no doubt in our mind that the Con--stitution of the High Court of Judicature at Baghdad-ul-Jadid embodies an act of the then sole legislative authority i.e. The Amir Ruler Bahadur of the State and as such has been since its being passed accepted as an enactment having the force of law. Proceeding further in his argument Mr. Nisar Ahmad referred to subsection (2) of section 3 of the 1952 Act. Subsection 1 of this section defines certain expressions. Subsection 2 of it lays down that in this Act unless context otherwise requires other expressions defined in the Constitution Act (Government of India Act of 1935 as adopted for Pakistan) shall have meanings assigned to them in the said Act. The expression "High Court" is not defined in subsection (1) of section 3 of the 1952 Act. Therefore Mr. Nisar Ahmad wants us to hold that omission to define the expression "High Court" in the State Interim Constitution Act, 1952 renders the provision contained in section 50 of the Act regarding the existence or establishment of a High Court for the State infructuous. He contends that provision should have been made in it on the lines of section 219 subsection (1) of the Government of India Act, 1935 as adopted for Pakistan. The position taken up by him is that this section i. e., section 219, contains definition of the expression "High Court" but it and section 311 of the said Act cannot be invoked for the definition of the expression "High Court" for purposes of section 50 of the Bahawalpur Act of 1952. While we agree with him that provision of section 219 (1) and section 311 of the Government of India Act 1935 as adopted for Pakistan cannot be invoked for purposes of section 50 of Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act, 1952 we do not see eye to eye with him as far as his contention relating to the necessity of a provision in it on the lines of section 219 (1) referred to above is concerned. A reference to section 219 (1) will show that it does not contain a definition properly so-called of the expression High Court. What the section does is that it gives the names of certain Courts which are to be deemed as High Courts for the purposes of Government of India Act, 1935 as adopted for Pakistan. Two of the Courts so named are described as High Courts i. e., the High Court at Lahore and the High Court of East Bengal while the other two are not so described. The Court exercising the powers of High Court in Sind is described as the Chief Court, while the Court exercising the same powers in the N. W. F. P. Is described as the Judicial Commissioner's Court. In order to avoid confusion about the meaning of expression High Court for the purposes of Government of India Act, 1935 as adopted for Pakistan section 219 was incorporated in that Act. The idea underlining it is that the Courts mentioned in that section whether described as High Court or otherwise shall be deemed to be High Courts for purposes of that Act. There does not exist any possibility of a confusion of this kind arising as far as the High Court in Bahawalpur State is concerned. There is only one High Court in the State and it is described as High Court. Therefore there was no necessity for making a provision in the Bahawalpur Constitution Act, 1952 on the lines of section 219 sub--section (1) of the Government of India Act, 1935 as adopted for Pakistan. Mr. Nisar Ahmad next took up section 50 itself and urged that as it stands it required the establishment of a new High Court for the State after the coming into force of the 1952 Act. Section 50 runs as follows:- "There shall be a High Court of Judicature for the State." Mr. Nisar Ahmad's argument in this connection is that since the provision of this section is mandatory therefore a new High Court should have been established in the State and that the existing High Court must be held to have ceased to function. Amplifying his arguments further he said that the section should be read as requiring that on the coming into force of the Act of 1952 a new High Court of Judicature shall be established for the State. We see no warrant for reading the additional words suggested by Mr. Nisar Ahmad into the section. It is true that the provision of this section is mandatory but it does not require that if a High Court existed at the time when the Act came into force it was to B be abolished or automatically ceased to function and a new one established in its place. We are of the view that the existing High Court amply satisfies the mandatory provision of section 50 With a view further to strengthen his arguments Mr. Nisar Ahmad referred to a number of sections of the Act in which the word "there shall be" are used. For instance section 11 (1) of the Act which provides that there shall be a Council of Ministers to aid and advise the Ruler,------------.The counsel contended that a new Council of Ministers was appointed after the coming into force of the Act. This argument appears to be based on the erroneous assumption that a Council of Ministers existed before the coming into force of the Act of 1952 and that the function of such Council of Ministers was to aid and advise the Ruler. No Council of Ministers for aiding and advising Alahazrat the Ruler in the exercise of his functions existed before the coming into force of 1952 Act. Similarly Mr. Nisar Ahmad's reference to sections 16 and 17 of the Act is not of any avail to him because the State Legislature of the kind envisaged in the former section and the Legislative Assembly of the description referred to in the latter section did not exist before the coming into force of the 1952 Act. The learned counsel also referred to section 200 of the Government of India Act, 1935 as adopted for Pakistan to which it is provided that there shall be a Federal Court in Pakistan. He contends that after the coming into being of Pakistan the Federal Court was established for it. This is so, but no Federal Court existed in Pakistan after partition and therefore a new Court answering the description given in sec--tion 200 had to be established. Mr. Nisar Ahmad laid a great stress on the absence of a definition of the expression High Court in the 1952 Act. He strenuously contended that in the absence of such a definition it is difficult to hold that the High Court of Judicature at Baghdad-ul---Jadid is the High Court as contemplated by section 50 of the 195 Act. We are not prepared to accept this argument of his either. In the first place the definition of High Court is given in the General Clauses Act for purpose of civil cases and in the Code of Criminal Procedure for criminal cases. According to these Acts which are in force in the State "High Court" means the highest. Court of civil and criminal appeals or revisions in any local area It is a well recognised principle of Interpretation of Statutes that Legislature must be presumed to be aware of the meaning of an expression defined or used in a former Statute and should be held to have used it in the same sense in a latter Statute. The Legislature which extended the application of General Clauses Act and the Code of Criminal Procedure to the State being the same as passed the Constitution of the High Court Act in 1937 and the Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act of 1952, it must be presumed that the expression "High Court" in the latter two enactments is used in the same sense and meaning as in the former two. This interpretation is in accord with the principle of beneficial construction which requires the J edges to make such construction as suppresses the mischief and advances the remedy. Mr. Nisar Ahmad's arguments in this behalf must therefore also fail. The counsel also referred to Article 214 (1) of the Constitution of India. This article also opens with the words there shall be, Mr. Nisar Ahmad contends that part 2 of the article gives the definition of the expression `'High Court" for purposes of the Constitution. This is however not the case. The object of enacting part 2 is made clear by its concluding words. The expression "Province" having been replaced in the Constitution by the expression "State" it was considered necessary to provide that High Courts functioning in areas formerly described as Provinces will be deemed to be High Courts for corresponding areas now described as States. "Notwithstanding the repeal of the Government of Bahawal--per Act, 1949, all the laws, rules or regulations having the force i; of law in force in the State immediately before the commence--ment of this Act shall continue in force in the State until altered or repealed or amended by tire Mate Legislature or other competent authority." The only other point which requires consideration before we finally dispose of this reference relates to the personnel of the present Judges of the High Court and not to its Constitution pro--perly so-called. This point was not formally raised by either party but informally suggested to us by both. Two of the Judges of this Court were appointed before the coming into force of the Interim Constitution Act of 1952. Therefore they took the oath of office as provided for in Constitution of the High Court Act of 1937. This oath was different from the oath of office pre--scribed in Schedule I of the Interim Constitution Act of 1552. The question which requires being looked into is the effect of the failure of the two Judges concerned to have taken the newly pre--scribed oath. The law as it stands requires that the Judges shall take the prescribed oath after their appointment and previous to their entering upon their duties. Both the Judges were appointed and entered upon their duties before the coming into force of 1952 Act, and duly took the oath then prescribed. The question whether it was or was not necessary for them to take the newly prescribed oath, important as it is, does not in my opinion have the effect of invalidating the Constitution of the High Court. The utmost that) can be said is that the High Court of Judicature at Baghdad-ul---Jadid is the High Court constituted under the High Court Consti--tution Act of 1937. We have already held above that this Act had the force of law when the Interim Constitution Act, 1952 came into force and therefore remains in force till it is altered, repealed or amended by a competent authority. However to put the matter beyond the pale of controversy we humbly suggest that Alahazrat the Amir Ruler may be pleased to order that arrangements may be made to enable the two Judges concerned to take the newly pre--scribed oath under section 51 (3) of the Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act of 1952. FINAL ORDER IN THE REVISION PETITION. FAIZ MUHAMMAD, C. J .-On a preliminary objection being raised by counsel for the respondent as to the validity of the Cons--titution of this High Court and hence to it 7, competence to hear the petition I referred the point to the Full Bench of this Court for decision. For my reasons to refer the matter to the Full Bench and the specific question so referred my order dated the 30th of September 1953, may be perused. The Full Bench consisting of all the three Judges of this Court has held that High Court of Judicature at Baghdad-ul-Jadid as at present functioning in the State is a validly and properly constituted High Court under section 50 of the Bahawalpur Interim Constitution Act of 1952, and also otherwise. For detailed reasons on which the Full Bench has based its decision reference may be made to its order dated 14th October 1953. At the resumed hearing of the revision petition before me Mr. Farzand Ali and Sh. Abdur Rehman Advocate appeared for Mr. Karim Hayat petitioner and S. Ahmad Nawaz Shah respondent respectively. Before Mr. Farzand Ali could begin his arguments Sh. Abdur Rahman raised another preliminary objection to the effect that the High Court should not have entertained this revision petition until after the petitioner had first moved the Sessions Judge or the District Magistrate or the Additional District Magistrate concerned, and failed to obtain redress for his grievance if any. It is true that according to the general practice of almost all the High Courts in this sub-continent the petitioners are required to move the one or the other of the lower Courts of revision in the first instance. But powers of revision vesting in the High Court and such other Courts under section 435, Cr. P. C are concurrent and, therefore, in the special circumstances of a particular case the High Court is not precluded from entertaining a petition directly. In the present case reasons for which I entertained this revision petition directly are firstly that the Sessions Judge at Rahimyar Khan was away on recess and the petitioner had made some allegations against the District Magistrate and secondly the petition involved the consideration of the provisions of a Federal Enactment i.e., the Evacuee Property Ordinance of 1949. I felt that I would be in a better position to appreciate the arguments of the parties on the point.Therefore ruling out Sh. Abdul Rahman's objection I called upon Mr. Farzand Ali to argue his petition. On 16th of September last S. Ahmad Nawaz Shah respondent made an application to the Magistrate, 1st Class, Sadiqabad in which among other things he alleged that he and Mr. Karim Hayat petitioner along with some others were allottees of the evacuee property (a ginning factory) known as the Dhanpat Mal Diwan Cband Factory at Sadiqabad. According to S. Ahmad Nawaz Shah the factory in question had been allotted to him and others including the petitioner for three years commencing with 1952. He further averred that the allottees peacefully worked the factory during the last cotton season but with the beginning of the present season Mr. Karim Hayat showed signs of trying to take exclusive possession of it and to remove the stock-in---trade, tools and parts etc. Lying on the premises. This according to S. Ahmad Nawaz Shah meant undue interference with his right as the managing allottee. He further alleged that on the day on which he made the application to the Court i.e. 16th September 1953, Mr. Karim Hayat petitioner had threatened him with violence and even murder if he dared to enter the factory. On the basis of these allegations Mr. Ahmad Nawaz Shah said that he apprehended a breach of peace and therefore prayed the Court for action under section 145, Cr. P. C. On receiving Mr. Ahmad Nawaz Shah's application the Magistrate, Sadiqabad recorded his statement and forwarded a copy of the application to the Inspector of Police, Sadiqabad with the order that the Inspector should immediately proceed to the spot find after making necessary enquiry report within three hours as to how matters stood. Accordingly the Inspector proceeded to the spot and after recording the statement of S. Ahmad Nawaz Shah and three other witnesses reported that there was an imminent danger of breach of peace. On receiving the Inspector's report along with the statements of witnesses he had recorded the Magistrate issued a notice to the parties to appear before him on 24th of September 1953, and put in written statements of their respective claims as respects the fact of actual possession of the subject of dispute. Simultaneously with this order the Magistrate also proceeded under proviso 2 of subsection (4) of section 145, Cr. P. C. And ordered the attachment of factory in dispute along with all the stock-in-trade etc. Lying on the premises. In pursuance of this order the Inspector attached the factory and sealed it. On receiving notice referred to above Mr. Karim Hayat find the present revision petition in this Court against the Magistrate's order. (1) That there was no apprehension of breach of peace and therefore the order of the Magistrate was without jurisdiction. (2) That control or possession of the parties over the factory was joint and therefore section 145, Cr. P. C. Did not apply. (3) That Mr. Karim Hayat and not S. Ahmad Nawaz Shah was the Managing Allottee of the factory and therefore he was entitled to its possession for the purposes of management. (4) That the property in dispute is not properly described in the notice issued to the petitioner. (5) That copy of the notice was not published as required by subsection (3) of section 145, Cr. P. C. and (6) That the factory in dispute being evacuee property could not be attached. I will deal with points raised by Mr. Farzand Ali one by one in the above order. 1. It is true that the existence of apprehension of breach of peace alone gives the Magistrate in-jurisdiction to proceed under section 145. The question which requires consideration however is as to who is to judge whether such an apprehension exists or not. Section 145, Cr. P. C. Provides for the satisfaction of the Magistrate in this behalf. It is therefore doubtful if the High Court while dealing with a case on the revision side can go into the matter. Subsection (5) provides that the order of the Magistrate under subsection (1) shall be final unless it is set aside by himself. I have carefully gone through the record of the Magistrate's Court and have come to the conclusion that as it stands it does show that a breach of peace was imminent. This may be due to the fact that instead of appearing before the Magis--trate and putting in written statement of his claim as respects the fact of actual possession and also about other matters Mr. Karim Hayat rushed to this Court. It is possible that if he had before coming to this Court appeared before the Magistrate and apprised him of the true situation he the Magistrate may have cancelled his order under subsection (5) of section 145, Cr. P. C. In these circumstances I am constrained to hold that the Magistrate did not act without jurisdiction as far as this point is concerned. There is however something in the Magistrate's order which makes me feel that he did not take as detached a view of the matter as he should have taken. While I hold that cases of apprehended breach of peace should be dealt with promptly I cannot help remarking that promptness does not necessarily mean a hasty action. After receiving the application and recording the applicant's statement the Magistrate ordered the Inspector of Police to make enquiry on the spot and report within three hours. This is something more than promptness. In my opinion it borders on undue haste. Probably it is this which made Mr. Karim Hayat doubt the impartiality of the Magistrate and compelled him to rush to the High Court. Coming to the second point raised by Mr. Farzand Ali I may point out that it is common ground between the parties that they along with others are joint allottees of the property in dispute. Their possession of it must therefore be presumed to be joint. Unfortunately however Mr. Karim Hayat on one hand and Syed Ahmad Nawaz Shah on the other claims that he is the managing allottee and as such entitled to exclusive possession of the property for purposes of its management. So although ordinarily section 145, Cr. P. C. Does not apply to cases of joint possession, in the present case however it would have applied but for reasons given below in connection with Mr. Farzand Ali's sixth objection. The real object of section 145 is to prevent a dispute about immovable property, for such disputes generally lead to breach of peace. A dispute is as likely to exist about a jointly possessed immovable property as about an exclusively possessed one. As regards Mr. Farzand Ali's third point i.e. That Mr. Karim Hayat and not S. Ahmad Nawaz Shah was the managing allottee of the factory and therefore the former was entitled to its possession, all I can say is that this is a question of fact and it is neither proper nor possible for me to go into it at this stage. Mr. Farzand Ali's fourth and fifth points relate to notice to Mr. Karim Hayat and the publication of the same under subsection (3) of section 145. I have no hesitation in holding that the property in dispute is not properly described in the notice issued to Mr. Karim Hayat. The question however which requires consideration is whether or not the omission occasioned any miscarriage of Justice. In other words can it be said that Mr. Karim Hayat was in any manner misled into believing that the notice related to some factory other than the one in dispute I am sure that Mr. Karim Hayat was not at all misled about the identity of the property in dispute. The defect in notice can--not therefore be viewed otherwise than an irregularity. As regards the publication of notice I may remark that the provision relating to it as contained in subsection (3) of section 145, Cr. P. C. Is mandatory. It has been held in a number of rulings of various High Courts that non-compliance with it has the effect of invalidating the proceedings. Looking upon the notice itself and taking into consideration the fact that it was not pro--perly published I am further convinced that the Magistrate acted with undue haste. The sixth point raised by Mr. Farzand Ali is in my opinion very important and requires more serious consideration. He contended before me that an Evacuee Property is not liable to attachment by the order of any Court, officer or authority. In support of his contention he referred to sections 4 and 12 of The Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property Ordinance of 1949. The two sections run as follows :- Section 4.-The provisions of this Ordinance, and any rule or order made thereunder, shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent herewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, or in any instrument having effect by virtue of such law. Section 12.-Property which has vested in, or of which possession has been taken by, the Custodian shall be exempt from all legal process, including seizure, distress, ejectment, attachment or sale by any officer of a Court, and no injunction or other order of whatever kind in respect of such property shall be granted or made by any Court. Section 4 above overrides all other laws by providing that the provisions of this Ordinance shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent with it in any other law for the time being in force. Section 12 exempts evacuee property from legal process including attachment thereof by any officer of Court or arty other authority. The words "or any other authority" were inserted by the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) (Amendment) Act of 1951. It will be noted that section 12 as it stands is very wide in its application. The words officer of a Court or any other authority include a Criminal Court or any other authority con--cerned with prevention and punishment of crime. On behalf of the respondent S. Ahmad Nawaz Shah, Sh. Abdur Rahman, Advocate contended that the words "officer of a Court" and "or any other authority" occurring in section 12 refer to the officer of a Civil or Revenue Court and a Civil or Revenue Authority and not to an officer of a Criminal Court or an authority concerned with prevention and punishment of crime. In support of his contention he has urged before me that the object of attachment under civil process is different from the object of attachment under section 145 which provides for prevention of breach of peace. I agree with him that there is a difference between the two kinds of attachment. But this by itself is no ground for holding that the word attachment as used in section 12 of the Ordinance referred to above applies only to an attachment ordered by a Civil or Revenue Court or Authority. Sh. Abdur Rahman next invited my attention to section 34 of the Ordinance in which the words used are "Civil or Revenue Courts." I have read and re-read this section and come to the conclusion that it does not help Sh. Abdur Rahman. Section 34 as it stands bars the jurisdiction of Civil and Revenue Courts in matters which are specified in it. The use of the words Civil or Revenue Court in this section far from helping Sh. Abdur Rahman actually lends support to the contention of Mr. Farzand Ali. If the Legislature had intended that an evacuee property would not be liable to attachment by officer of a Civil or Revenue Court only it would have said so in section 12. The language of subsection (1) of section 12 as it stands is unambiguous and all-embracing. Sh. Abdur Rahman was unable to produce before me any authority in support of his contention touching upon the interpretation of subsection (1) of section 12. In the absence of any authority on the point it is not possible for me to ignore the plain meanings of the section and read into it words which the Legislature did not consider proper to employ. Some if not all the forms of process mentioned in section 12 (1) can be issued by Criminal, Civil and Revenue Courts or Authorities Attach--ment is one such process. In the absence of a clear indication to the contrary I have no alternative but to hold that exemption of evacuee property from legal process applies to the process of all the Courts and authorities alike. As a last resort Sh. Abdur Rahman challenged the validity of the Evacuee Property Ordinance itself as far as its application to the State is concerned. He urged that Central Legislature or the Governor-General has no power to legislate about evacuee property in the State. This contention of Sh. Abdur Rahman is not tenable either. In the first place subsection (3) of section I of the Ordinance extends its application to acceding States, Apart from this the application of the Ordinance was also extend--ed to the Stata by the State Government Notification No. 104 L. D. Dated the 8th of November 1949. A. H.Attachment set aside. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem