EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark GHAUS KHAN vs NAZIR KHAN R.O.R. No. 1835 of 1988 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: GHAUS KHAN Respondant: NAZIR KHAN Result: N/A Judgment Date: 1994-05-29 Court: Board of Revenue, Punjab Judges: Imtiaz Masrur Citations Advocates Statutes K.L.R. 1995 Revenue Cases 136 Judgment ORDER IMTIAZ MASRUR, MEMBER (JUDICIAL-II).- This is a revision petition against the order dated 21.9.1988 of Additional Commissioner (Revenue), Gujranwala Division, Gujranwala, whereby he dismissed the appeal of the petitioner. 2. The facts are that in Settlement operations in village Bara Manga, Tehsil Shikargah, District Sialkot, Khasra No. 3879 measuring 4 marlas was withdrawn from Ghaus Khan petitioner and given to Nazir Khan respondent and in its place Khasra No. 2328 measuring 4 marlas was withdrawn from Nazir Khan respondent and given to Ghaus Khan, petitioner. The said modification was approved/confirmed by the A.C./Collector vide his order dated 6.7.1983. The petitioner filed and appeal before the Additional Commissioner (Revenue), Gujranwala Division, Gujranwala, which was dismissed vide his order dated 21.9.1988. Hence this revision petition. 3. I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the respondent. 4. The learned counsel for the petitioner has stated that the settlement operations in the village took place in the year 1977-78, while the consolidation operation took place in 1987-88. He further stated that the disputed land measuring 4 marlas in Khasra No: 3879 was given to Ghaus Khan. The new number allotted was 3042. The learned counsel for the petitioner further stated that 4 marlas had been taken away from the petitioner without any lawful authority. It has further been stated that the petitioner came to know about the impugned t order on 7.5.1984 but he failed to get a copy of the impugned order. 5. The learned counsel for the respondent, on the other had, stated that the Collector's order dated 6.7.1983 had not been challenged. Even in the revision petition collector's order has not been challenged nor has a copy been attached. He further stated that the possession was with the respondent, and entries in the Mutation Register had also been made. He further stated that Ghaus Khan was present on 6.7.1983 when the Collector passed the order and, therefore, his appeal was badly time barred. 6. In his right of reply the learned counsel for the petitioner pointed out that in Jamabandi for the year 1980-81 the disputed land measuring 4 marlas was in the name of the petitioner. In Misl-e-Haqiat Ishtimal 1987-88 also this area was shown in the name of the petitioner. 7. I have given my careful thought to the arguments put forth by both sides. 8. The main grounds for rejection of the appeal in the impugned order were that the appeal was time barred, copy of the impugned order had not been attached and the conclusion of the Additional Commissioner (Rev.) was that the proceedings regarding modification of the land in dispute had been made in the presence of the parties. A perusal of the impugned order shows that it was based more on technical grounds than on merit. The petitioner claims that he had put in it of effort and energy in planting the fruit trees etc. It will be more appropriate to decide the case on merits rather than on mere technicalities. The order of the Additional Commissioner (Revenue), Gujranwala Division, Gujranwala dated 21.9.1988 is, therefore, set aside, the revision petition is accepted and the case is remanded to the collector for decision strictly on merit and according to law. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue, Punjab Judge(s): Imtiaz Masrur Title: GHAUS KHAN vs NAZIR KHAN Case No.: R.O.R. No. 1835 of 1988 Date of Judgment: 1994-05-29 Reported As: K.L.R. 1995 Revenue Cases 136 Result: N/A Judgment ORDER IMTIAZ MASRUR, MEMBER (JUDICIAL-II).- This is a revision petition against the order dated 21.9.1988 of Additional Commissioner (Revenue), Gujranwala Division, Gujranwala, whereby he dismissed the appeal of the petitioner. 2. The facts are that in Settlement operations in village Bara Manga, Tehsil Shikargah, District Sialkot, Khasra No. 3879 measuring 4 marlas was withdrawn from Ghaus Khan petitioner and given to Nazir Khan respondent and in its place Khasra No. 2328 measuring 4 marlas was withdrawn from Nazir Khan respondent and given to Ghaus Khan, petitioner. The said modification was approved/confirmed by the A.C./Collector vide his order dated 6.7.1983. The petitioner filed and appeal before the Additional Commissioner (Revenue), Gujranwala Division, Gujranwala, which was dismissed vide his order dated 21.9.1988. Hence this revision petition. 3. I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the respondent. 4. The learned counsel for the petitioner has stated that the settlement operations in the village took place in the year 1977-78, while the consolidation operation took place in 1987-88. He further stated that the disputed land measuring 4 marlas in Khasra No: 3879 was given to Ghaus Khan. The new number allotted was 3042. The learned counsel for the petitioner further stated that 4 marlas had been taken away from the petitioner without any lawful authority. It has further been stated that the petitioner came to know about the impugned t order on 7.5.1984 but he failed to get a copy of the impugned order. 5. The learned counsel for the respondent, on the other had, stated that the Collector's order dated 6.7.1983 had not been challenged. Even in the revision petition collector's order has not been challenged nor has a copy been attached. He further stated that the possession was with the respondent, and entries in the Mutation Register had also been made. He further stated that Ghaus Khan was present on 6.7.1983 when the Collector passed the order and, therefore, his appeal was badly time barred. 6. In his right of reply the learned counsel for the petitioner pointed out that in Jamabandi for the year 1980-81 the disputed land measuring 4 marlas was in the name of the petitioner. In Misl-e-Haqiat Ishtimal 1987-88 also this area was shown in the name of the petitioner. 7. I have given my careful thought to the arguments put forth by both sides. 8. The main grounds for rejection of the appeal in the impugned order were that the appeal was time barred, copy of the impugned order had not been attached and the conclusion of the Additional Commissioner (Rev.) was that the proceedings regarding modification of the land in dispute had been made in the presence of the parties. A perusal of the impugned order shows that it was based more on technical grounds than on merit. The petitioner claims that he had put in it of effort and energy in planting the fruit trees etc. It will be more appropriate to decide the case on merits rather than on mere technicalities. The order of the Additional Commissioner (Revenue), Gujranwala Division, Gujranwala dated 21.9.1988 is, therefore, set aside, the revision petition is accepted and the case is remanded to the collector for decision strictly on merit and according to law. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem