EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark GHULAM MUHAMMAD vs THE STATE ROR No. 1032 of 1988 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: GHULAM MUHAMMAD Respondant: THE STATE Result: N/A Judgment Date: 1991-02-12 Court: Board of Revenue Judges: Asad Ali Shah Citations Advocates Statutes (K.L.R. 1996 Revenue Cases 109) Judgment ORDER ASAD ALI SHAH, MEMBER.- This is a revision petition against the orders of Additional Commissioner (Revenue), Sargodha Division, Sargodha dated 7-5- 1988, whereby he had refused grant of State land measuring 99 Kanals, 15 marlas in Chak No. 4/DB, Tehsil and District Mianwali to the petitioner under the Temporary Cultivation Scheme. 2. Briefly the position is that the petitioner Ghulam Muhammad had applied for grant of land under the 15 Years Lease Scheme in 1971 after 31-5- 1971 i.e. The last date fixed for the purpose. However he was granted the lease of State land in Chak No. 4/DB, Tehsil and District Mianwali on basis of being recorded as landless tenant-during Kharif, 1969 to Kharif, 1970. Subsequently, there were complaints against such allotments which were alleged to be irregular and Commissioner, Sargodha Division, Sargodha directed the Assistant Commissioner/Collector, Mianwali to conduct an open enquiry in respect of such allotments who after holding the enquiry came to the conclusion that a number of allotments were irregular. Thus in the case of the petitioner Ghulam Muhammad son of Ahmad, it was reported that he was not found to be in cultivating tenant in the estate during crucial period of Kharif, 1969 to Kharif, 1970. Deputy Commissioner/Collector therefore, however, the possession continued to be with the petitioner. 3. In appeal, the Additional Commissioner (Consolidation), Sargodha held on 19-12-1977 that the District Collector had no authority to review the orders of Assistant Commissioner/Collector as they had concurrent jurisdiction and therefore accepted the appeal. District Collector, Mianwali went in revision before my learned predecessor who on 29-5-983 (in R.O.R. No. 1463 of 1978-79) remanded the case with the direction that if the allotments were irregular, these should be cancelled. Thus in case like that of the petitioner it was mentioned that if he was not cultivating land from Kharif, 1969 to Kharif, 1970 or was owner of more than 4 acres, he was not eligible to get the lease. In remand, the Assistant Commissioner/Collector found on 12-8-1987 that the petitioner was recorded as a landless cultivating tenant during the crucial harvest and he was still in possession of the impugned land, but at the same the held that in the meantime a part of the allotment had been granted to Mst Ashraf Khatoon and Mst. Barkat Kliatoon under the Atomic Energy Complex Oustees Scheme and could not be given to the petitioner. This was upheld in appeal by Additional Commissioner (Revenue) as per impugned order, on the sole ground that a permanent scheme had preference over leases on temporary cultivation. Hence this revision. 4. I have heard the parties and seen the record. It is apparent therefrom that the petitioner was eligible for grant of the impugned land under 15 Years Lease Scheme. The basic issue to be decided is therefore whether the petitioners have a vested right which would prevent such land to be disposed of under a permanent scheme like the Atomic Energy Complex Oustees Scheme. It is noted that the impugned area was included in the Atomic Energy Complex Scheme in 1980 and there was a notification dated 3-9-1979 which granted concession of Proprietary rights to regular lessees of Temporary Cultivation Schemes who were in cultivating possession since before Kharif, 1977. However under the above notification the eligible lessees had to apply for proprietary rights before a certain date which according to the record before me was not done in this case. Consequently, any vested right with the petitioner had acquired in the land had not been availed of by them. The original lease expired in 1986 and they are now in occupation without authority. Since the land had thus become available, the allotments in the name of respondents are maintained as being valid. However, the petitioner can retain whichever is left from his original allotment as fresh lessee. 5. Judgment was reserved and may now be communicated to all concerned. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue Judge(s): Asad Ali Shah Title: GHULAM MUHAMMAD vs THE STATE Case No.: ROR No. 1032 of 1988 Date of Judgment: 1991-02-12 Reported As: (K.L.R. 1996 Revenue Cases 109) Result: N/A Judgment ORDER ASAD ALI SHAH, MEMBER.- This is a revision petition against the orders of Additional Commissioner (Revenue), Sargodha Division, Sargodha dated 7-5- 1988, whereby he had refused grant of State land measuring 99 Kanals, 15 marlas in Chak No. 4/DB, Tehsil and District Mianwali to the petitioner under the Temporary Cultivation Scheme. 2. Briefly the position is that the petitioner Ghulam Muhammad had applied for grant of land under the 15 Years Lease Scheme in 1971 after 31-5- 1971 i.e. The last date fixed for the purpose. However he was granted the lease of State land in Chak No. 4/DB, Tehsil and District Mianwali on basis of being recorded as landless tenant-during Kharif, 1969 to Kharif, 1970. Subsequently, there were complaints against such allotments which were alleged to be irregular and Commissioner, Sargodha Division, Sargodha directed the Assistant Commissioner/Collector, Mianwali to conduct an open enquiry in respect of such allotments who after holding the enquiry came to the conclusion that a number of allotments were irregular. Thus in the case of the petitioner Ghulam Muhammad son of Ahmad, it was reported that he was not found to be in cultivating tenant in the estate during crucial period of Kharif, 1969 to Kharif, 1970. Deputy Commissioner/Collector therefore, however, the possession continued to be with the petitioner. 3. In appeal, the Additional Commissioner (Consolidation), Sargodha held on 19-12-1977 that the District Collector had no authority to review the orders of Assistant Commissioner/Collector as they had concurrent jurisdiction and therefore accepted the appeal. District Collector, Mianwali went in revision before my learned predecessor who on 29-5-983 (in R.O.R. No. 1463 of 1978-79) remanded the case with the direction that if the allotments were irregular, these should be cancelled. Thus in case like that of the petitioner it was mentioned that if he was not cultivating land from Kharif, 1969 to Kharif, 1970 or was owner of more than 4 acres, he was not eligible to get the lease. In remand, the Assistant Commissioner/Collector found on 12-8-1987 that the petitioner was recorded as a landless cultivating tenant during the crucial harvest and he was still in possession of the impugned land, but at the same the held that in the meantime a part of the allotment had been granted to Mst Ashraf Khatoon and Mst. Barkat Kliatoon under the Atomic Energy Complex Oustees Scheme and could not be given to the petitioner. This was upheld in appeal by Additional Commissioner (Revenue) as per impugned order, on the sole ground that a permanent scheme had preference over leases on temporary cultivation. Hence this revision. 4. I have heard the parties and seen the record. It is apparent therefrom that the petitioner was eligible for grant of the impugned land under 15 Years Lease Scheme. The basic issue to be decided is therefore whether the petitioners have a vested right which would prevent such land to be disposed of under a permanent scheme like the Atomic Energy Complex Oustees Scheme. It is noted that the impugned area was included in the Atomic Energy Complex Scheme in 1980 and there was a notification dated 3-9-1979 which granted concession of Proprietary rights to regular lessees of Temporary Cultivation Schemes who were in cultivating possession since before Kharif, 1977. However under the above notification the eligible lessees had to apply for proprietary rights before a certain date which according to the record before me was not done in this case. Consequently, any vested right with the petitioner had acquired in the land had not been availed of by them. The original lease expired in 1986 and they are now in occupation without authority. Since the land had thus become available, the allotments in the name of respondents are maintained as being valid. However, the petitioner can retain whichever is left from his original allotment as fresh lessee. 5. Judgment was reserved and may now be communicated to all concerned. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem