EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark Haji NAZAR MUHAMMAD vs JUMO Case No,S.R.O.R. No,13 of 1988 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: Haji NAZAR MUHAMMAD Respondant: JUMO Result: Revision accepted Judgment Date: 1988-06-22 Court: Board of Revenue Judges: Ayaz Hussain Ansari Citations Advocates Statutes P L D 1988 Revenue 82 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' This is a revision petition against the order dated 21-12-1987 passed by the learned Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad Division, Hyderabad whereby he rejected the appeal of the petitioner in respect of an area of 0-07 ghuntas bhada land in mohag of S.Nos.630/3 and 631/4 of Deh Sahirki Taluka Tando Allahyar. 2. Heard the counsel for the parties and perused the relevant record, and case reserved for orders on 26-4-1988. 3. Brief facts of the case in nut shell are that Nazar Muhammad son of Murad Muhammad had recorded full rate offer for an area of 0-7 ghuntas of bhada land in mohag of S.Nos.630/3 and 631/4 of Deh Sahirki Taluka Tando Allahyar after issue of no objection certificate to the disposal of bhada land without water by the XEN Halla. One Jumo (who is respondent in petition) had made an application to the Colonization Offier Sukkur Barrage, Hyderabad stating therein that he is in possession of land measuring 0-7 ghuntas and there are shops and houses etc. Of the respondent and land in question and as such this piece of land may be granted to him. The Colonization Officer however decided the case vide his order dated 10-6-1974 as under:-- (i) granted 0-3 ghuntas to Jumo on the ground that Jumo had shop, Otak in the area which is in his possession. (ii) granted 0-4 ghuntas for Asaish purpose for the public bus stop. (iii) and copy of order was sent to the Deputy Commissioner for further action accordingly. 4. The petitioner had filed an appeal against the above grant order before the Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad Division, Hyderabad who vide impugned order has 'rejected the appeal of the petitioner being time-barred. Hence the petitioner has preferred the present Revision petition. 5. The parties presented an application for compromise which was accepted. It was, however, found that the compromise was illegal for the reasons that the entire land had not been granted to the parties and the original order was prima facie without jurisdiction and therefore illegal, void and non-existent in the eyes of law...The parties were the counsel that the land had been granted to the parties for no given fresh notice through their counsel. It was conceded by both agricultural purposes and the entire land had not been initially granted to them by the Colonization Officer. They also could not produce any authority under which the Colonization Officer was competent to dispose of agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes. After hearing the arguments the case had been reserved for orders. 6. The counsel for the petitioner has mainly contended that the learned Colonization Officer had granted an area 0-03 ghuntas from Bhada land for non-agricultural purpose to the respondent Jumo for which the learned Colonization Officer was not competent as the grant is against the policy contained in Notification No,KB-l/1/30/772/7098, dated 12-5-1975. Hence the order of the Colonization Officer is void, illegal and against the policy. He, therefore, prayed that the grant of the respondent may be cancelled. 7. The counsel for the respondent urged that the grant order was passed in presence of the petitioner who did not raise any objection, before the Colonization Officer for grant of 0-3 ghuntas to Jumo hence he is to be governed by law of permanent estoppel and he cannot agitate the factum of grant of disputed area of 0-3 ghuntas to Jumo. The counsel for the respondent further argued that the appeal of the petitioner before the Additional Commissioner was time-barred by more than 10 years and the Additional Commissioner has rightly rejected the appeal of the petitioner being time-barred. He therefore, prayed that present revision petition may be rejected as it merits no consideration. 8. I have considered the arguments of the counsel for the parties and also perused the case papers. It transpires from the original grant order dated 10-6-1974 of the Colonization Officer, Sukkur Barrage that he had granted an area 0-3 ghuntas to the respondent Jumo for non-agricultural purpose. Apparently the order of the Colonization Officer is illegal, void being without jurisdiction as he was not competent to grant land to any one for the purpose other than agriculture under any of the provisions of law and the land grant policy approved by Government. In the instant case he granted land to respondent Jumo for non-agricultural purpose as such his order is void and no period of limitation is prescribed against such A void and illegal order. It also reveals from the grant order of the Colonization Officer that he had granted the land to the respondent on the ground that the land in question was in possession of the respondent who had constructed shop and Otak in the area in question. The Colonization Act does not recognise unauthorised possession. A person having unauthorised possession of a piece of land is not a tenant and such possession does not confer any right on such occupant. Furthermore, it was beyond the jurisdiction of the Colonization Officer to grant the disputed land for non-agricultural purposes. 9. For the foregoing reasons, the grant of the respondent is cancelled. ' Orders accordingly. ' Since the orders had been reserved in the matter let its copies be sent to the parties through their Advocates. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue Judge(s): Ayaz Hussain Ansari Title: Haji NAZAR MUHAMMAD vs JUMO Case No.: Case No,S.R.O.R. No,13 of 1988 Date of Judgment: 1988-06-22 Reported As: P L D 1988 Revenue 82 Result: Revision accepted Judgment ORDER ' This is a revision petition against the order dated 21-12-1987 passed by the learned Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad Division, Hyderabad whereby he rejected the appeal of the petitioner in respect of an area of 0-07 ghuntas bhada land in mohag of S.Nos.630/3 and 631/4 of Deh Sahirki Taluka Tando Allahyar. 2. Heard the counsel for the parties and perused the relevant record, and case reserved for orders on 26-4-1988. 3. Brief facts of the case in nut shell are that Nazar Muhammad son of Murad Muhammad had recorded full rate offer for an area of 0-7 ghuntas of bhada land in mohag of S.Nos.630/3 and 631/4 of Deh Sahirki Taluka Tando Allahyar after issue of no objection certificate to the disposal of bhada land without water by the XEN Halla. One Jumo (who is respondent in petition) had made an application to the Colonization Offier Sukkur Barrage, Hyderabad stating therein that he is in possession of land measuring 0-7 ghuntas and there are shops and houses etc. Of the respondent and land in question and as such this piece of land may be granted to him. The Colonization Officer however decided the case vide his order dated 10-6-1974 as under:-- (i) granted 0-3 ghuntas to Jumo on the ground that Jumo had shop, Otak in the area which is in his possession. (ii) granted 0-4 ghuntas for Asaish purpose for the public bus stop. (iii) and copy of order was sent to the Deputy Commissioner for further action accordingly. 4. The petitioner had filed an appeal against the above grant order before the Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad Division, Hyderabad who vide impugned order has 'rejected the appeal of the petitioner being time-barred. Hence the petitioner has preferred the present Revision petition. 5. The parties presented an application for compromise which was accepted. It was, however, found that the compromise was illegal for the reasons that the entire land had not been granted to the parties and the original order was prima facie without jurisdiction and therefore illegal, void and non-existent in the eyes of law...The parties were the counsel that the land had been granted to the parties for no given fresh notice through their counsel. It was conceded by both agricultural purposes and the entire land had not been initially granted to them by the Colonization Officer. They also could not produce any authority under which the Colonization Officer was competent to dispose of agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes. After hearing the arguments the case had been reserved for orders. 6. The counsel for the petitioner has mainly contended that the learned Colonization Officer had granted an area 0-03 ghuntas from Bhada land for non-agricultural purpose to the respondent Jumo for which the learned Colonization Officer was not competent as the grant is against the policy contained in Notification No,KB-l/1/30/772/7098, dated 12-5-1975. Hence the order of the Colonization Officer is void, illegal and against the policy. He, therefore, prayed that the grant of the respondent may be cancelled. 7. The counsel for the respondent urged that the grant order was passed in presence of the petitioner who did not raise any objection, before the Colonization Officer for grant of 0-3 ghuntas to Jumo hence he is to be governed by law of permanent estoppel and he cannot agitate the factum of grant of disputed area of 0-3 ghuntas to Jumo. The counsel for the respondent further argued that the appeal of the petitioner before the Additional Commissioner was time-barred by more than 10 years and the Additional Commissioner has rightly rejected the appeal of the petitioner being time-barred. He therefore, prayed that present revision petition may be rejected as it merits no consideration. 8. I have considered the arguments of the counsel for the parties and also perused the case papers. It transpires from the original grant order dated 10-6-1974 of the Colonization Officer, Sukkur Barrage that he had granted an area 0-3 ghuntas to the respondent Jumo for non-agricultural purpose. Apparently the order of the Colonization Officer is illegal, void being without jurisdiction as he was not competent to grant land to any one for the purpose other than agriculture under any of the provisions of law and the land grant policy approved by Government. In the instant case he granted land to respondent Jumo for non-agricultural purpose as such his order is void and no period of limitation is prescribed against such A void and illegal order. It also reveals from the grant order of the Colonization Officer that he had granted the land to the respondent on the ground that the land in question was in possession of the respondent who had constructed shop and Otak in the area in question. The Colonization Act does not recognise unauthorised possession. A person having unauthorised possession of a piece of land is not a tenant and such possession does not confer any right on such occupant. Furthermore, it was beyond the jurisdiction of the Colonization Officer to grant the disputed land for non-agricultural purposes. 9. For the foregoing reasons, the grant of the respondent is cancelled. ' Orders accordingly. ' Since the orders had been reserved in the matter let its copies be sent to the parties through their Advocates. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem