EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark HAJI KHAN AND 2 OTHERS vs KHAMISO KHAN AND ANOTHERs Case Rs, SROR-131 of 1971-72, Judgment Details Cited by 1 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: HAJI KHAN AND 2 OTHERS Respondant: KHAMISO KHAN AND ANOTHERs Result: N/A Judgment Date: 1975-06-07 Court: Board of Revenue Judges: D. S. Soomro Citations Advocates Statutes P L D 1985 Rev. 194 [Sind] Subsequent References Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ORDER ' This is a revision petition against the order, dated 7-6-1971 passed by the Addl. Commissioner, Hyderabad whereby he had rejected petitioners' appeal regarding mutation of S. Nos. 21/A, B, 37, 68/1, 2, 3, 71/1, 2, 3, 78, 82, 83, 75, 369 and 422 Deh Barochani, Taluka and District Hyderabad. 2 The facts of the case briefly stated are that the disputed land was sold by Sanjar Khan as attorney of the petitioners to the respondents by a registered sale-deed. The respondents approached the Settlement Mukatiarkar, for change of the Khata but their request was rejected by him vide has order, dated 1-4-1909 mainly on the ground that the petitioners denied that Sanjar Khan was their attorney. The respondents preferred an appeal to the Settlement Officer, Hyderabad who accepted the same vide his order, dated 30-7-1969. The petitioners preferred an appeal to the Addl Commissioner, Hyderabad who rejected it vide the impugned order. 3. Heard the counsel for the parties. The counsel for the petitioners contended that the alienation is void as there is contravention of Para. 25 of repealed M.L.R. 64 of 1959 while counsel for the respondents contended that there is no such contravention. Both the counsels have relied upon Revenue Ruling 11 page 483 by Mr. I. U. Khan the then Chief Land Commissioner of West Pakistan and urged that the joint holding is to be treated as one Unit for the purpose of Para. 25 of the repealed M. L. Regulation and that there is no contravention so long as the joint holding is not reduced below the subsistence holding. The counsel for the petitioners added that the joint holding had been reduced below subsistence holding while the counsel for the respondent contended that it had not been reduced and continued to remain as joint holding even after the alienation. The total area of the joint holding is 44.21 Acres. Some alienations took place in respect of the holding but according to these alienations also undivided shares in joint holding were alienated and obviously the joint holding continued to remain as such. After the disputed alienation of 21-23 Acres, the holding was reduced to 22.38 Acres and it was above subsistence holding. Hence the provisions of Para. 25 of repealed M.L.R. 64 of 1959 were not attracted in this case. This view is confirmed by the instruction contained in Circular letter ASR-796/62-5794-LC, dated 5-11.1962 of the defunct-West Pakistan Land Commission. 4. Besides the above point the petitioner had raised the following additional points in his petition of appeal :- (i) Sanjar Khan Hajano, who had executed the deed in respect of the disputed alienation had no power-of-attorney from the petitioners to sell their land and the document if any, was a forged one ; (ii) The petitioners had not received consideration in respect of the land. The consideration had not been paid and it should have been paid before the Sub-Registrar before whom the document was registered. 5. The counsel for the petitioner has not pressed these points in his verbal arguments. However, the points involve finding of fact and question of fraud and can very well be agitated in civil Court. The revenue Courts are not expected to go into complicated questions of fact in summary proceedings on Record of Rights side. Consequently there is no justification for interference with the orders of the lower Courts even on this account. 6. For the above reasons, there is no force in the revision petition which is rejected. Revision rejected. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue Judge(s): D. S. Soomro Title: HAJI KHAN AND 2 OTHERS vs KHAMISO KHAN AND ANOTHERs Case No.: Case Rs, SROR-131 of 1971-72, Date of Judgment: 1975-06-07 Reported As: P L D 1985 Rev. 194 [Sind] Result: N/A Judgment ORDER ORDER ' This is a revision petition against the order, dated 7-6-1971 passed by the Addl. Commissioner, Hyderabad whereby he had rejected petitioners' appeal regarding mutation of S. Nos. 21/A, B, 37, 68/1, 2, 3, 71/1, 2, 3, 78, 82, 83, 75, 369 and 422 Deh Barochani, Taluka and District Hyderabad. 2 The facts of the case briefly stated are that the disputed land was sold by Sanjar Khan as attorney of the petitioners to the respondents by a registered sale-deed. The respondents approached the Settlement Mukatiarkar, for change of the Khata but their request was rejected by him vide has order, dated 1-4-1909 mainly on the ground that the petitioners denied that Sanjar Khan was their attorney. The respondents preferred an appeal to the Settlement Officer, Hyderabad who accepted the same vide his order, dated 30-7-1969. The petitioners preferred an appeal to the Addl Commissioner, Hyderabad who rejected it vide the impugned order. 3. Heard the counsel for the parties. The counsel for the petitioners contended that the alienation is void as there is contravention of Para. 25 of repealed M.L.R. 64 of 1959 while counsel for the respondents contended that there is no such contravention. Both the counsels have relied upon Revenue Ruling 11 page 483 by Mr. I. U. Khan the then Chief Land Commissioner of West Pakistan and urged that the joint holding is to be treated as one Unit for the purpose of Para. 25 of the repealed M. L. Regulation and that there is no contravention so long as the joint holding is not reduced below the subsistence holding. The counsel for the petitioners added that the joint holding had been reduced below subsistence holding while the counsel for the respondent contended that it had not been reduced and continued to remain as joint holding even after the alienation. The total area of the joint holding is 44.21 Acres. Some alienations took place in respect of the holding but according to these alienations also undivided shares in joint holding were alienated and obviously the joint holding continued to remain as such. After the disputed alienation of 21-23 Acres, the holding was reduced to 22.38 Acres and it was above subsistence holding. Hence the provisions of Para. 25 of repealed M.L.R. 64 of 1959 were not attracted in this case. This view is confirmed by the instruction contained in Circular letter ASR-796/62-5794-LC, dated 5-11.1962 of the defunct-West Pakistan Land Commission. 4. Besides the above point the petitioner had raised the following additional points in his petition of appeal :- (i) Sanjar Khan Hajano, who had executed the deed in respect of the disputed alienation had no power-of-attorney from the petitioners to sell their land and the document if any, was a forged one ; (ii) The petitioners had not received consideration in respect of the land. The consideration had not been paid and it should have been paid before the Sub-Registrar before whom the document was registered. 5. The counsel for the petitioner has not pressed these points in his verbal arguments. However, the points involve finding of fact and question of fraud and can very well be agitated in civil Court. The revenue Courts are not expected to go into complicated questions of fact in summary proceedings on Record of Rights side. Consequently there is no justification for interference with the orders of the lower Courts even on this account. 6. For the above reasons, there is no force in the revision petition which is rejected. Revision rejected. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem