EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark Haji GHULAM RASOOL vs ALLAH DITTA And Other Constitutional Appeal No. 3 of 1947 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: Haji GHULAM RASOOL Respondant: ALLAH DITTA And Other Result: Appeal allowed Judgment Date: 1947-12-20 Court: Baghdad-ul-Jadid Judges: Din Muhammad Khem Chand Citations Advocates Statutes P L D 1950 Baghdad-ul-Jadid 19 Judgment JUDGMENT.--- JUDGMENT The only question involved in this appeal is whether the order passed by the Additional, District Judge on the 14th August 1945 and later confirmed by Syed Ghulam ,Murtaza Shah, judge, by which the appellant's suit was dismissed under O. IX, R. 8. Civil Procedure Code should beset aside. The facts are these. On the 9 th August 1943 the appellant instituted a suit against the respondents for recovery of Rs. 2,000. Protracted proceed--ings took place in the suit until the 14th July 1945 when it was adjourned to the 14th August for arguments. On that day the case was called on' for hearing at 9 a. m. But the appel--lant was absent. The Additional District judge consequently dismissed the suit as stated above. A quarter of an hour later the appellant appeared in Court and made an application under O. IX. R. 9. Civil Procedure Code, for setting aside the dismissal. It was sated therein that' the petitioner's wife was seriously ill and that he had gone to consult the doctor about her illness. This application was supported by an affidavit duly sworn. On the 21st October the plaintiff also put in written arguments in support of his application and stressed ;-- (a) that as the parties evidence had closed and only argu--ments were to be heard, the case could not be legally dismissed under O. IX, r. 8. Civil Procedure Code. Even if the appellant happened to be absent. (b) that the Court should have waited up to the end of the day. This application was resifted by the respondents. The appellant examined Dr. Abdul Aziz to show that lie had actually on the day in question visited .The doctor in con--nection with his 'wife's .Illness. " The Additional District judge, however, did not-rely upon this evidence and holding that there were no grounds for setting aside the order of dismissal rejected the application: From this order the appellant preferred an appeal to this Court which was heard by Syed Ghulam Murtaza Shah, Judge. The learned judge agreed with the order of the Court below and dismissed the appeal. We have heard the parties and have come to the conclusion that in the special circumstances of the case the order of dismissal of the suit should be set aside. The absence` was obviously) unintentional inasmuch as the appellant had appeared in Court within fifteen minutes of the dismissal and even if there was no sufficient ground for his absence, the appellant deserved a lenient consideration at the hands of the Court. -Reference in this connection may be made to a Division Bench judgment of the Bombay High Court, reported as 53 I. C. 253 which was later followed by the Rangoon High Court in 95 I.C. 521. Even otherwise, this order could only be made under O. XVII, R. 2, Civil Procedure Code, and not O. IX, R. 8, Civil Procedure Code which- comes into play only when the parties absent themselves on the first hearing, and under that rule it is not imperative on a Court to dismiss the suit in the absence of the plaintiff but it can make even arty other order that it thinks fit. See A I R 1929 Patna 248 and A I R 1939 Nag. 213. Considering that no evidence was to be led and the case was fixed for arguments only the Court could easily have heard the arguments of the other side and disposed of the case on the merits. 1t could even wait until the end of the day for this pur--pose. On the grounds set forth above we allow this appeal, set aside the order of dismissal and remand the case to the Court of Subordinate Judge, Bahawalpur, for disposal in accordance with law. There 'will be no order as to costs. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Baghdad-ul-Jadid Judge(s): Din Muhammad, Khem Chand Title: Haji GHULAM RASOOL vs ALLAH DITTA And Other Case No.: Constitutional Appeal No. 3 of 1947 Date of Judgment: 1947-12-20 Reported As: P L D 1950 Baghdad-ul-Jadid 19 Result: Appeal allowed Judgment JUDGMENT.--- JUDGMENT The only question involved in this appeal is whether the order passed by the Additional, District Judge on the 14th August 1945 and later confirmed by Syed Ghulam ,Murtaza Shah, judge, by which the appellant's suit was dismissed under O. IX, R. 8. Civil Procedure Code should beset aside. The facts are these. On the 9 th August 1943 the appellant instituted a suit against the respondents for recovery of Rs. 2,000. Protracted proceed--ings took place in the suit until the 14th July 1945 when it was adjourned to the 14th August for arguments. On that day the case was called on' for hearing at 9 a. m. But the appel--lant was absent. The Additional District judge consequently dismissed the suit as stated above. A quarter of an hour later the appellant appeared in Court and made an application under O. IX. R. 9. Civil Procedure Code, for setting aside the dismissal. It was sated therein that' the petitioner's wife was seriously ill and that he had gone to consult the doctor about her illness. This application was supported by an affidavit duly sworn. On the 21st October the plaintiff also put in written arguments in support of his application and stressed ;-- (a) that as the parties evidence had closed and only argu--ments were to be heard, the case could not be legally dismissed under O. IX, r. 8. Civil Procedure Code. Even if the appellant happened to be absent. (b) that the Court should have waited up to the end of the day. This application was resifted by the respondents. The appellant examined Dr. Abdul Aziz to show that lie had actually on the day in question visited .The doctor in con--nection with his 'wife's .Illness. " The Additional District judge, however, did not-rely upon this evidence and holding that there were no grounds for setting aside the order of dismissal rejected the application: From this order the appellant preferred an appeal to this Court which was heard by Syed Ghulam Murtaza Shah, Judge. The learned judge agreed with the order of the Court below and dismissed the appeal. We have heard the parties and have come to the conclusion that in the special circumstances of the case the order of dismissal of the suit should be set aside. The absence` was obviously) unintentional inasmuch as the appellant had appeared in Court within fifteen minutes of the dismissal and even if there was no sufficient ground for his absence, the appellant deserved a lenient consideration at the hands of the Court. -Reference in this connection may be made to a Division Bench judgment of the Bombay High Court, reported as 53 I. C. 253 which was later followed by the Rangoon High Court in 95 I.C. 521. Even otherwise, this order could only be made under O. XVII, R. 2, Civil Procedure Code, and not O. IX, R. 8, Civil Procedure Code which- comes into play only when the parties absent themselves on the first hearing, and under that rule it is not imperative on a Court to dismiss the suit in the absence of the plaintiff but it can make even arty other order that it thinks fit. See A I R 1929 Patna 248 and A I R 1939 Nag. 213. Considering that no evidence was to be led and the case was fixed for arguments only the Court could easily have heard the arguments of the other side and disposed of the case on the merits. 1t could even wait until the end of the day for this pur--pose. On the grounds set forth above we allow this appeal, set aside the order of dismissal and remand the case to the Court of Subordinate Judge, Bahawalpur, for disposal in accordance with law. There 'will be no order as to costs. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem