EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark Hay INAYATULLAH vs ADDITIONAL COMMISSIONER, HYDERABAD and another Case No,SROR-335 of 1981 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: Hay INAYATULLAH Respondant: ADDITIONAL COMMISSIONER, HYDERABAD and another Result: Grant ressred Judgment Date: 1986-05-08 Court: Board of Revenue Judges: Amir Yusuf Ali Khan Citations Advocates Statutes 1986 M L D 2362 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' This is a revision petition filed against the order, dated 6-10-1981 of the learned Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad whereby he rejected the appeal of the petitioner in respect of B. Nos. 284 and 54 area 32-00 Acres of Deh Akaro, Taluka Tando Bago and maintained the order of Revenue Officer, Kotri Barrage, Hyderabad, dated 11-6-1980. 2. The counsel for the petitioner, the representative of the M.F.R.O. And the Revenue Officer, Kotri Barrage, Hyderabad, are present and have been heard. The land is shown be with the petitioner. The cancellation was done by the .Revenue Officer, Kotri Barrage, Hyderabad simply on the recommendation of the M.F.R.O. Without issuing an notice the petitioner. It is a grant of the petitioner since 1964 and some installments have been paid. The land is mostly under water. 3. I hereby allow the revision petition and restore the land under dispute in the petitioner's favour. He should make efforts to bring it under cultivation and fulfil all other conditions of grant. Grant ressred. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue Judge(s): Amir Yusuf Ali Khan Title: Hay INAYATULLAH vs ADDITIONAL COMMISSIONER, HYDERABAD and another Case No.: Case No,SROR-335 of 1981 Date of Judgment: 1986-05-08 Reported As: 1986 M L D 2362 Result: Grant ressred Judgment ORDER ' This is a revision petition filed against the order, dated 6-10-1981 of the learned Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad whereby he rejected the appeal of the petitioner in respect of B. Nos. 284 and 54 area 32-00 Acres of Deh Akaro, Taluka Tando Bago and maintained the order of Revenue Officer, Kotri Barrage, Hyderabad, dated 11-6-1980. 2. The counsel for the petitioner, the representative of the M.F.R.O. And the Revenue Officer, Kotri Barrage, Hyderabad, are present and have been heard. The land is shown be with the petitioner. The cancellation was done by the .Revenue Officer, Kotri Barrage, Hyderabad simply on the recommendation of the M.F.R.O. Without issuing an notice the petitioner. It is a grant of the petitioner since 1964 and some installments have been paid. The land is mostly under water. 3. I hereby allow the revision petition and restore the land under dispute in the petitioner's favour. He should make efforts to bring it under cultivation and fulfil all other conditions of grant. Grant ressred. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem