EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark IHSAN-UL-HAQ vs EXECUTIVE ENGINEER HIGHWAY and others RFA No, 50 of 1999 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: IHSAN-UL-HAQ Respondant: EXECUTIVE ENGINEER HIGHWAY and others Result: Appeal dismissed Judgment Date: 2005-03-22 Court: Peshawar High Court Judges: Nasir-ul-Mulk Ijaz-ul-Hassan Khan Author Citations Advocates Statutes PLJ 2006 Peshawar 182 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT Ijaz-ul-Hassan J .--RFA No, 50/99 titled Ihsan-ul-Haq and others appellants vs. Executive Engineer Highway, Mardan Division Mardan and others, respondents and RFA No, 70/99, titled Collector and Acquisition, Nowshera and other appellants vs. Ihsanul Haq and others, respondents, call in question the legality and propriety of the impugned judgment and decree dated 14.7.1999 announced by learned Senior Civil Judge/Referee Judge, Nowshera in Objection Petition No, 6/4 of 1994, enhancing compensation - amount of the land in question. This common judgment is proposed to disposed of both the appeals. 2. Vide Award 'No, 4/143/LAC NSR, the Collector acquired land including land of Ihsan-ul-Haq and others for construction of a bridge and approach road for `chowki' District Nowshera. The compensation amount not acceptable to appellants Ihsan-ul-Haq and others, they filed a reference under Section 18 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, seeking enhancement in the rate of compensation with compulsory acquisition charge etc. The reference was resisted and claim of the appellants was denied. Relevant issues were formulated for trial and the parties produced pro and contra evidence. At the conclusion, by means of judgment and decree dated 14.7.1999, the learned trial Judge fixed a sum of Rs, 10,000/- per marla as sale price of the land in question alongwith 15% compulsory acquisition charges plus 6% interest from 4.10.1992 till payment/deposit of the entire compensation amount. 3. The land owners namely, Ihsan-ul-Haq and others as well as the Collector Acquisition, feeling aggrieved of the rate of compensation have approached this Court by way of filing instant appeals. 4. Mr. Tauqeer Ahmad Lodhi, Advocate, learned counsel for Ihsan-ul-Haq and others appellants in RFA 50/99 bitterly criticized the impugned and decree and attempted to argue that the learned trial judge had not properly appreciated the evidence and other material on record; that the report of the local commission was ignored and kept aside without any valid reasons that owners of the adjoining lands have been adequately compensated viz-a-viz the appellants and that no compensation has been awarded for standing crops and fruit trees which has resulted in manifest injustice. 5. Contrarily, Mr. Muhammad Ayaz, Deputy Advocate General maintained that the compensation amount has been increased without any justifiable reason; that learned trial judge has wrongly relied upon the report of local commission which itself vas based on no evidence; that the market value of land is to be taken as existing on date of publication of notification under Section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1848 in view of Section 23 of the same Act; that the price already fixed in the Award was quite adequate and the Land Acquisition Collector had assessed the price of land keeping all the considerations in view and in the ibsence of solid documentary evidence learned trial Court was not justified to enhance the rate of land from Rs, 1004/- to Rs, 10,000/- per mar/a. 6. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length and have also gone through the record minutely. We are of the view that the compensation determined by the learned Senior Civil Judge/Referee Judge Nowshera is quite adequate and fair in view of the material on record and the report of the local commission appointed by the Court pursuant to the remand order of this Court. The local commissioner has given a detailed and comprehensive report which has been rightly taken into consideration and made basis of the impugned decision. There is nothing on the file to demonstrate that the local commission has gone out of the way and as such, his report is not worth reliance. He has taken every aspect of the case into account and has prepared a detailed and comprehensive report which cannot be ignored. It has been mainly submitted on behalf of the appellants that the.' impugned judgment and decree suffers from the vice of mis-reading and non-reading of evidence and 'is not sustainable under the law. The submission is devoid of force. The learned counsel has remained unable to point out any such mis-reading or non-appreciating evidence resulting into mis-carriage of justice. Finding no fault with the impugned judgment and decree, we maintain the same and dismiss the appeals with no order as to costs. We had, by our short order announced in Court on 22.3.2005 dismissed the appeals and maintained the impugned judgment and decree, for reasons to be recorded later. Above are detailed reasons for the same. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Peshawar High Court Judge(s): Nasir-ul-Mulk, Ijaz-ul-Hassan Khan Title: IHSAN-UL-HAQ vs EXECUTIVE ENGINEER HIGHWAY and others Case No.: RFA No, 50 of 1999 Date of Judgment: 2005-03-22 Reported As: PLJ 2006 Peshawar 182 Result: Appeal dismissed Judgment JUDGMENT Ijaz-ul-Hassan J .--RFA No, 50/99 titled Ihsan-ul-Haq and others appellants vs. Executive Engineer Highway, Mardan Division Mardan and others, respondents and RFA No, 70/99, titled Collector and Acquisition, Nowshera and other appellants vs. Ihsanul Haq and others, respondents, call in question the legality and propriety of the impugned judgment and decree dated 14.7.1999 announced by learned Senior Civil Judge/Referee Judge, Nowshera in Objection Petition No, 6/4 of 1994, enhancing compensation - amount of the land in question. This common judgment is proposed to disposed of both the appeals. 2. Vide Award 'No, 4/143/LAC NSR, the Collector acquired land including land of Ihsan-ul-Haq and others for construction of a bridge and approach road for `chowki' District Nowshera. The compensation amount not acceptable to appellants Ihsan-ul-Haq and others, they filed a reference under Section 18 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, seeking enhancement in the rate of compensation with compulsory acquisition charge etc. The reference was resisted and claim of the appellants was denied. Relevant issues were formulated for trial and the parties produced pro and contra evidence. At the conclusion, by means of judgment and decree dated 14.7.1999, the learned trial Judge fixed a sum of Rs, 10,000/- per marla as sale price of the land in question alongwith 15% compulsory acquisition charges plus 6% interest from 4.10.1992 till payment/deposit of the entire compensation amount. 3. The land owners namely, Ihsan-ul-Haq and others as well as the Collector Acquisition, feeling aggrieved of the rate of compensation have approached this Court by way of filing instant appeals. 4. Mr. Tauqeer Ahmad Lodhi, Advocate, learned counsel for Ihsan-ul-Haq and others appellants in RFA 50/99 bitterly criticized the impugned and decree and attempted to argue that the learned trial judge had not properly appreciated the evidence and other material on record; that the report of the local commission was ignored and kept aside without any valid reasons that owners of the adjoining lands have been adequately compensated viz-a-viz the appellants and that no compensation has been awarded for standing crops and fruit trees which has resulted in manifest injustice. 5. Contrarily, Mr. Muhammad Ayaz, Deputy Advocate General maintained that the compensation amount has been increased without any justifiable reason; that learned trial judge has wrongly relied upon the report of local commission which itself vas based on no evidence; that the market value of land is to be taken as existing on date of publication of notification under Section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1848 in view of Section 23 of the same Act; that the price already fixed in the Award was quite adequate and the Land Acquisition Collector had assessed the price of land keeping all the considerations in view and in the ibsence of solid documentary evidence learned trial Court was not justified to enhance the rate of land from Rs, 1004/- to Rs, 10,000/- per mar/a. 6. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length and have also gone through the record minutely. We are of the view that the compensation determined by the learned Senior Civil Judge/Referee Judge Nowshera is quite adequate and fair in view of the material on record and the report of the local commission appointed by the Court pursuant to the remand order of this Court. The local commissioner has given a detailed and comprehensive report which has been rightly taken into consideration and made basis of the impugned decision. There is nothing on the file to demonstrate that the local commission has gone out of the way and as such, his report is not worth reliance. He has taken every aspect of the case into account and has prepared a detailed and comprehensive report which cannot be ignored. It has been mainly submitted on behalf of the appellants that the.' impugned judgment and decree suffers from the vice of mis-reading and non-reading of evidence and 'is not sustainable under the law. The submission is devoid of force. The learned counsel has remained unable to point out any such mis-reading or non-appreciating evidence resulting into mis-carriage of justice. Finding no fault with the impugned judgment and decree, we maintain the same and dismiss the appeals with no order as to costs. We had, by our short order announced in Court on 22.3.2005 dismissed the appeals and maintained the impugned judgment and decree, for reasons to be recorded later. Above are detailed reasons for the same. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-14 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem