EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark K.P. NARAYAN APPA SETTY & CO vs COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX, A. P. R.C.No. 8 of 1970, Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: K.P. NARAYAN APPA SETTY & CO Respondant: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX, A. P. Result: Question answered in the negative Judgment Date: 2000-01-04 Court: Andhra Paradesh High Court Judges: Chinnappa Reddy A. D. V. Reddy Citations Advocates Statutes 35 TAX 26 Judgment JUDGMENT [The judgment of the court was delivered by A.D.V. Reddy J.]-The question referred to us by the Appellate Tribunal is as follows: "Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, any penalty was exigible in the assessee's case for the assessment year 1946- 47?" For the assessment year 1946-47 the assessee was assessed to a certain sum of tax and the assessment became final on July 24,1954. But there was no order levying penalty in his case till July 1, 1963. Though no period for levying the penalty has been fixed in the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, it has been held by this court that there should not be any inordinate delay and it should be livied within a reasonable time. Even under the new Act the period prescribed for levy of penalty is two years after the completion of the assessment. Tn the present case, even after the order of the Tribunal on the assessment a period of nine years had elapsed. The department has not chosen to furnish any explanation for the in ordinate delay. Here reduction in the quantum of penalty is not a ground to say hat no interference is juistified. As there is inordinate delay we consider that the levy of penalty has not been made within a reasonable time. We therefore, answer the reference in the negative. There will be no order costs. Advocate's fee, Rs. 100.. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Andhra Paradesh High Court Judge(s): Chinnappa Reddy, A. D. V. Reddy Title: K.P. NARAYAN APPA SETTY & CO vs COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX, A. P. Case No.: R.C.No. 8 of 1970, Date of Judgment: 2000-01-04 Reported As: 35 TAX 26 Result: Question answered in the negative Judgment JUDGMENT [The judgment of the court was delivered by A.D.V. Reddy J.]-The question referred to us by the Appellate Tribunal is as follows: "Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, any penalty was exigible in the assessee's case for the assessment year 1946- 47?" For the assessment year 1946-47 the assessee was assessed to a certain sum of tax and the assessment became final on July 24,1954. But there was no order levying penalty in his case till July 1, 1963. Though no period for levying the penalty has been fixed in the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, it has been held by this court that there should not be any inordinate delay and it should be livied within a reasonable time. Even under the new Act the period prescribed for levy of penalty is two years after the completion of the assessment. Tn the present case, even after the order of the Tribunal on the assessment a period of nine years had elapsed. The department has not chosen to furnish any explanation for the in ordinate delay. Here reduction in the quantum of penalty is not a ground to say hat no interference is juistified. As there is inordinate delay we consider that the levy of penalty has not been made within a reasonable time. We therefore, answer the reference in the negative. There will be no order costs. Advocate's fee, Rs. 100.. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem