EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark KHANI ZAMAN vs AZAD GOVERNMENT Through Chief Secretary, Azad Jammu And Kashmir, Muzaffarabad And 3 Others Service Appeal No. 679 of 1993 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: KHANI ZAMAN Respondant: AZAD GOVERNMENT Through Chief Secretary, Azad Jammu And Kashmir, Muzaffarabad And 3 Others Result: Order accordingly Judgment Date: 1994-01-24 Court: Azad Jammu and Kashmir Service Tribunal Judges: Abdul Hameed Khan Raja Bashir Ahmad Khan Citations Advocates Statutes 1994 P L C (C.S.) 1256 Judgment JUDGMENT RAJA BASHIR AHMAD KHAN (CHAIRMAN).--- This appeal is directed against the Order No. Admin. W.IV/M-360, dated 4-1-1993 whereby the respondents 3 and 4 were assigned senior position to that of appellant by learned Chief Secretary, Azad Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 2. The brief facts of the case are that appellant was promoted as Steno--typist in Grade B-8 on 29-5-1979 in the Directorate of Local Government and Rural Development. He was promoted to Grade B-12 as Senior Scale Stenographer on 10-4-1982 in the same Department. The appellant was adjusted in the Local Government Secretariat on 1-7-1985 and was later on transferred/adjusted in the Department of Development on the same date. The appointment/promotion of the appellant as Senior Scale Stenographer was confirmed on the recommendation of the Selection Committee on 4-6-1987 giving effect from 2-4-1987. A tentative seniority list of Senior Scale Stenographers of the Secretariat was issued on 4-11-1986 and the same was ` made final on 23-5-1989. The respondents Nos. 3 and 4 were promoted as Senior Scale Stenographers on 9-5-1989. A temporary seniority list of Senior Scale Stenographers was again issued on 25-1-1990. Respondents Nos. 3 and 4 filed objections against the tentative seniority list before Additional Chief Secretary and Section Officer of Services and General Administration Department on 8-2-1990 and 26-2-1990 respectively. The objections of the respondents Nos.3 and 4 were rejected by the then Chief Secretary on 20-8-1991. Despite the rejection of claims of respondents Nos. 3 and 4 the Chief Secretary declared respondents Nos. 3 and 4 senior to appellant vide the impugned order on the miscellaneous applications of respondents. The appellant preferred an appeal before the Worthy Prime Minister of Azad Jammu and Kashmir which still awaits decision. Appellant after awaiting for statutory period of ninety days has filed this appeal. 3. Appellant has assailed the impugned order on the following grounds. (A) That the worthy Chief Secretary has fallen into grave error by not appreciating that the humble appellant was promoted as Senior Scale Stenographer on April 10, 1982 who was confirmed as such on April 2, 1987 while respondents Nos. 3 and 4 were promoted as such on May 9, 1989 who are junior more than 2 years to the appellant even from the date of confirmation needing the impugned -order to be set aside on this solitary ground. (B) That the appellant was promoted as Senior Scale Stenographer of April 10, 1982 against which both the respondents neither filed any appeal nor representation review before any forum. Similarly the appellant was confirmed as such on April 2, 1987 which orders have gone unchallenged however, this important aspect of this case lost consideration of respondent No. 2, therefore, impugned order is void as such. (C) That again the appellant was promoted as personal Assistant vide order bearing No. Admin/W-IV/SG-90/40, dated December 3, 1990 which order has also not been challenged by respondents 3 and 4 thus acceptance of their time-barred application and that too against law of the land needs the interference of this Honourable Tribunal. Above promotion order is annexed as Annexure `O'. (D) That as respondents Nos. 3 and 4 never objection against promotions -' of the appellants as Senior Scale Stenographer in the year 1982 then in the year 1987 and again the. Promotion of the appellant as Personal Assistant have not been challenged from which it is crystal clear that the respondents Nos. 3 and 4 accepted seniority of the appellant but later on their objections and application were consisting malice which were liable to be rejected from this angle as well. (E) That respondents 3 and 4 neither filed any appeal nor any review or representation as stated earlier against promotions of the appellant therefore a miscellaneous application for determining their seniority was against statutory law and rules but this point of law was not taken into consideration by the Chief Secretary needing reversal of the impugned order. (F) That a final seniority list of Senior Scale Stenographers was framed by the Department on May 23, 1989 in which the names of the respondents Nos. 3 and 4 were not incorporated but they never objected to above seniority list which too got finality in the eyes of law however this important aspect of this case was not considered for unknown reasons. (G) That even otherwise objection, of the said respondents were not considered by the then Chief Secretary which were filed against temporary seniority list dated January 25, 1990 on August 20, 1991 hence again the Chief Secretary could not reopen the whole case as such. (H) That due to three different promotions of the appellant and because of final seniority list without names of the respondents got finality, hence while declaring such junior most Stenographers it was mandatory for respondent No. 2 to give an opportunity of hearing to the appellant which vitiates whole the impugned order because of universal principle of audi alteram partem. (I) That the appellant graves permission to argue other grounds at the time of hearing. 4. Objections 5 have been filed on behalf of the respondents. The respondents have not- accepted the claim of the appellant and the appellant has also filed replication wherein he has reiterated his case as made out in the memorandum of appeal. 5. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have minutely gone through the record 6. The service record of the appellant and claim of appellant as Senior Scale Stenographer in the Department of Local Government is not very much relevant from the decision of present appeal for the reason that the respective claim of the parties are to be considered from the date when the appellant was adjusted in the Department of Development on 1-7-1985. The appellant has stressed in his memorandum of appeal and it has also been agitated on his behalf during the course of arguments that his name was entered in the tentative seniority list which was issued on 4-11-1986. This seniority list was made final on 23-5-1989. This seniority is not helpful to appellant on the ground that he was according to his own version promoted in Civil Secretariat vide Order No. Admin/W-IV/56-114/87, dated 4-6-1987 as senior scale Stenographer. The wrong entry of the name of appellant in the said seniority list Ex. `DB' has been explained by the appellant's witness Manzoor Ali Khokhar, Section Officer who has stated that the name of the appellant was entered in the seniority list by mistake. The explanation given by this witness is that the appellant was in Scale B-15 which was his personal scale in the parent Department and by mistake his name was entered in the temporary seniority list. The respondents have alleged in written objections that they were appointed as Stenographers in Grade B-12 on 1-7-1983. It is again an admitted fact that appellant was adjusted in Civil Secretariat with effect from 1-7-1985 as Stenographer in the Department of Planning and Development vide order Exh. `DA'. This shows that the respondents were senior to the appellant in Grade-12. 7. Inter se seniority of the parties is to be determined in accordance with section 7 of Azad Jammu and Kashmir Civil Servants Act, 1976 in the prescribed manner. This prescribed manner has been provided under Rule 8 of Azad Jammu and Kashmir Civil Servant (Appointments and Conditions of Service) Rules which is reproduced as under:-- "The seniority inter se of persons appointed to post in the same grade in a Functional Unit shall be determined: (1)(a) In the case of persons appointed by initial recruitment, in accordance with the order of merit, assigned by the selection authority. Provided that persons, selected for appointment to the grade in an earlier selection shall rank senior to the persons selected in a later selection; and (b) In the case of persons appointed otherwise, with reference to the dates of their continuous appointment in the grade; provided that if the date of continuous appointment in the case of two or more persons appointed to the grade is the same, the .Older if not junior to the younger in the next below grade, shall rank senior to the younger person. Explanation.--If a person junior in a lower grade is promoted to a higher grade on ad hoc basis, in the public interest, even though continuing later permanently in the higher grade, it would not adversely affect the interest of his seniors in the fixation of his seniority in the higher grade. Explanation II.--If a person junior in a lower grade is promoted to higher grade by superseding his senior and subsequently the later is also promoted, the promoted first shall rank senior to the one promoted subsequently. Explanation III.--Subject to the provisions of Rule 14 of those rules, a junior appointed to a higher grade shall be deemed to have superseded his senior only if both the junior and the senior were considered for the higher grade and the junior was appointed in preference to the senior. (2) The seniority of the two persons appointed by initial recruitment to the grade vis-a-vis those appointed otherwise shall be determined with reference to the date of continuous appointment to the grade: Provided that if two dates are the same, the person appointed otherwise shall rank senior to the person appointed by initial recruitment: Provided further that inter se seniority of persons belonging to same category will not be altered. Explanation.--In case a group of persons is selected for initial appointment at one time, the earliest date on which any one out of the group joined the service will be deemed to be the date of appointment of all persons in the group. Similarly in case of group of persons is appointed otherwise at one time in the same office order the earliest date on which any one out of the group joined the service will be deemed to be the date of appointment of all persons in the group. And the persons in each group will be placed with reference to the continuous date of appointment as a group in order of their inter se seniority. (3) Notwithstanding the provisions of this rule, the seniority lists already prepared in accordance with the rules applicable immediately before the commencement of these rules shall be construed as seniority lists for the respective now grades in respect of persons already in service and amendments therein shall continue to be made in accordance with those rules to settle inter se seniority disputes among them. Sub-clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of this rule is relevant in this case. According to this sub-rule inter se seniority of persons appointed otherwise than initial recruitment is to be determined with reference to the dates of their continuous appointment in the grade. Admittedly the appellant entered in Grade B-12 on 1-7-1985 in Civil Secretariat whereas respondents entered in the same grade on 1-7-1983. The selection authority did not care to take into account this seniority position of respondents and without considering the case of respondents for the higher grade promoted appellant as Senior Scale Stenographer in B-15. The appellant could not, in the circumstances claim a senior position to that of respondents Nos. 3 and 4. 8. Despite of our above view of the matter, we have to address the proposition as to whether the impugned order is sustainable in the eyes of law. The perusal of the record shows that respondents on 27-11-1991 addressed a letter to Accountant-General of Azad Jammu and Kashmir wherein they stated that the pay of appellant who is working in the Department of Law and Parliamentary Affairs has wrongly been fixed and requested for recovery of excess payment. The learned counsel for appellant has raised the point that the respondents have failed to challenge the order of promotion of the appellant. This order attained the finality and could not be disturbed by the Chief Secretary. Appellant was promoted vide Order No. 87/113/ (SHOBA-E-INTAZAMIA), dated 4-6-1987. The promotion was given effect from 2-4-1987. The learned counsel for respondents has replied that the order of promotion of appellant was made without any notice to them and they are not bound by it. The arguments of learned counsel for respondents could be sustained if the facts on the record prove that the respondents had no knowledge or notice of the order of promotion of appellant dated 4-6-1987. It is correct that the respondents were not considered along with the appellant and the order was made without considering their case but from their own letter dated 27-11-1991 addressed to Accountant-General of Azad Jammu and Kashmir it is clear that they had the knowledge that appellant Khani Zaman was performing his duties as Personal Assistant in the Department of Law and Parliamentary Affairs and this post carries the Pay Scale B-16. The appellant as Personal Assistant was in Grade B-16 and this was only possible if the appellant was previously placed in Grade B-15. The fact that the appellant was in Grade B-16 on 27-11-1991 the respondents must have known that he was in Grade B-15 before his appointment as Personal Assistant in Law Department. The order of promotion of appellant unless challenged and set aside by the competent appellant authority will continue to occupy the ground as a valid order. This order was passed by the Chief Secretary. Under the Appeal Rules the order could be challenged before the next higher Authority which in this case is the Prime Minister. Instead of approaching the competent authority the respondents pursued their case in form of miscellaneous applications before the Chief Secretary who was not competent to review his own order. If we reckoned the period from 27-11-1991 the appeal before the Prime Minister could be filed within sixty days of this date. We believe that the respondents have so far taken no step to get rid of the operation of the order of the promotion of appellant. This order, therefore, has attained finality and Chief Secretary was not competent to pass any order which could make the order of promotion of appellant as invalid and in operative. The Supreme Court of Azad Jammu and Kashmir in Civil Appeal No. 44 of 1993 entitled Rehmat Ullah Awan v. Azad Government and others has in the same set of facts held that the appellant allowed the seniority list to attain finality and, therefore, his appeal was rightly dismissed as time-barred by the Service Tribunal. Following the decision of the Supreme Court, we are of the view that respondents failed to challenge the order of promotion of appellant within time and in accordance with the channel available to the respondents to get the declaration of invalidity of the order from a competent forum. 9. In view of the above, we are of the opinion that the impugned order is liable to be set aside and we proceed to ordered accordingly with the directions that the seniority position of the appellant be restored as originally assigned in seniority list issued under No. Admin/S.O-IV/1Vi-360/90 dated 25-1-1990. We make no order as to costs. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Azad Jammu and Kashmir Service Tribunal Judge(s): Abdul Hameed Khan, Raja Bashir Ahmad Khan Title: KHANI ZAMAN vs AZAD GOVERNMENT Through Chief Secretary, Azad Jammu And Kashmir, Muzaffarabad And 3 Others Case No.: Service Appeal No. 679 of 1993 Date of Judgment: 1994-01-24 Reported As: 1994 P L C (C.S.) 1256 Result: Order accordingly Judgment JUDGMENT RAJA BASHIR AHMAD KHAN (CHAIRMAN).--- This appeal is directed against the Order No. Admin. W.IV/M-360, dated 4-1-1993 whereby the respondents 3 and 4 were assigned senior position to that of appellant by learned Chief Secretary, Azad Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 2. The brief facts of the case are that appellant was promoted as Steno--typist in Grade B-8 on 29-5-1979 in the Directorate of Local Government and Rural Development. He was promoted to Grade B-12 as Senior Scale Stenographer on 10-4-1982 in the same Department. The appellant was adjusted in the Local Government Secretariat on 1-7-1985 and was later on transferred/adjusted in the Department of Development on the same date. The appointment/promotion of the appellant as Senior Scale Stenographer was confirmed on the recommendation of the Selection Committee on 4-6-1987 giving effect from 2-4-1987. A tentative seniority list of Senior Scale Stenographers of the Secretariat was issued on 4-11-1986 and the same was ` made final on 23-5-1989. The respondents Nos. 3 and 4 were promoted as Senior Scale Stenographers on 9-5-1989. A temporary seniority list of Senior Scale Stenographers was again issued on 25-1-1990. Respondents Nos. 3 and 4 filed objections against the tentative seniority list before Additional Chief Secretary and Section Officer of Services and General Administration Department on 8-2-1990 and 26-2-1990 respectively. The objections of the respondents Nos.3 and 4 were rejected by the then Chief Secretary on 20-8-1991. Despite the rejection of claims of respondents Nos. 3 and 4 the Chief Secretary declared respondents Nos. 3 and 4 senior to appellant vide the impugned order on the miscellaneous applications of respondents. The appellant preferred an appeal before the Worthy Prime Minister of Azad Jammu and Kashmir which still awaits decision. Appellant after awaiting for statutory period of ninety days has filed this appeal. 3. Appellant has assailed the impugned order on the following grounds. (A) That the worthy Chief Secretary has fallen into grave error by not appreciating that the humble appellant was promoted as Senior Scale Stenographer on April 10, 1982 who was confirmed as such on April 2, 1987 while respondents Nos. 3 and 4 were promoted as such on May 9, 1989 who are junior more than 2 years to the appellant even from the date of confirmation needing the impugned -order to be set aside on this solitary ground. (B) That the appellant was promoted as Senior Scale Stenographer of April 10, 1982 against which both the respondents neither filed any appeal nor representation review before any forum. Similarly the appellant was confirmed as such on April 2, 1987 which orders have gone unchallenged however, this important aspect of this case lost consideration of respondent No. 2, therefore, impugned order is void as such. (C) That again the appellant was promoted as personal Assistant vide order bearing No. Admin/W-IV/SG-90/40, dated December 3, 1990 which order has also not been challenged by respondents 3 and 4 thus acceptance of their time-barred application and that too against law of the land needs the interference of this Honourable Tribunal. Above promotion order is annexed as Annexure `O'. (D) That as respondents Nos. 3 and 4 never objection against promotions -' of the appellants as Senior Scale Stenographer in the year 1982 then in the year 1987 and again the. Promotion of the appellant as Personal Assistant have not been challenged from which it is crystal clear that the respondents Nos. 3 and 4 accepted seniority of the appellant but later on their objections and application were consisting malice which were liable to be rejected from this angle as well. (E) That respondents 3 and 4 neither filed any appeal nor any review or representation as stated earlier against promotions of the appellant therefore a miscellaneous application for determining their seniority was against statutory law and rules but this point of law was not taken into consideration by the Chief Secretary needing reversal of the impugned order. (F) That a final seniority list of Senior Scale Stenographers was framed by the Department on May 23, 1989 in which the names of the respondents Nos. 3 and 4 were not incorporated but they never objected to above seniority list which too got finality in the eyes of law however this important aspect of this case was not considered for unknown reasons. (G) That even otherwise objection, of the said respondents were not considered by the then Chief Secretary which were filed against temporary seniority list dated January 25, 1990 on August 20, 1991 hence again the Chief Secretary could not reopen the whole case as such. (H) That due to three different promotions of the appellant and because of final seniority list without names of the respondents got finality, hence while declaring such junior most Stenographers it was mandatory for respondent No. 2 to give an opportunity of hearing to the appellant which vitiates whole the impugned order because of universal principle of audi alteram partem. (I) That the appellant graves permission to argue other grounds at the time of hearing. 4. Objections 5 have been filed on behalf of the respondents. The respondents have not- accepted the claim of the appellant and the appellant has also filed replication wherein he has reiterated his case as made out in the memorandum of appeal. 5. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have minutely gone through the record 6. The service record of the appellant and claim of appellant as Senior Scale Stenographer in the Department of Local Government is not very much relevant from the decision of present appeal for the reason that the respective claim of the parties are to be considered from the date when the appellant was adjusted in the Department of Development on 1-7-1985. The appellant has stressed in his memorandum of appeal and it has also been agitated on his behalf during the course of arguments that his name was entered in the tentative seniority list which was issued on 4-11-1986. This seniority list was made final on 23-5-1989. This seniority is not helpful to appellant on the ground that he was according to his own version promoted in Civil Secretariat vide Order No. Admin/W-IV/56-114/87, dated 4-6-1987 as senior scale Stenographer. The wrong entry of the name of appellant in the said seniority list Ex. `DB' has been explained by the appellant's witness Manzoor Ali Khokhar, Section Officer who has stated that the name of the appellant was entered in the seniority list by mistake. The explanation given by this witness is that the appellant was in Scale B-15 which was his personal scale in the parent Department and by mistake his name was entered in the temporary seniority list. The respondents have alleged in written objections that they were appointed as Stenographers in Grade B-12 on 1-7-1983. It is again an admitted fact that appellant was adjusted in Civil Secretariat with effect from 1-7-1985 as Stenographer in the Department of Planning and Development vide order Exh. `DA'. This shows that the respondents were senior to the appellant in Grade-12. 7. Inter se seniority of the parties is to be determined in accordance with section 7 of Azad Jammu and Kashmir Civil Servants Act, 1976 in the prescribed manner. This prescribed manner has been provided under Rule 8 of Azad Jammu and Kashmir Civil Servant (Appointments and Conditions of Service) Rules which is reproduced as under:-- "The seniority inter se of persons appointed to post in the same grade in a Functional Unit shall be determined: (1)(a) In the case of persons appointed by initial recruitment, in accordance with the order of merit, assigned by the selection authority. Provided that persons, selected for appointment to the grade in an earlier selection shall rank senior to the persons selected in a later selection; and (b) In the case of persons appointed otherwise, with reference to the dates of their continuous appointment in the grade; provided that if the date of continuous appointment in the case of two or more persons appointed to the grade is the same, the .Older if not junior to the younger in the next below grade, shall rank senior to the younger person. Explanation.--If a person junior in a lower grade is promoted to a higher grade on ad hoc basis, in the public interest, even though continuing later permanently in the higher grade, it would not adversely affect the interest of his seniors in the fixation of his seniority in the higher grade. Explanation II.--If a person junior in a lower grade is promoted to higher grade by superseding his senior and subsequently the later is also promoted, the promoted first shall rank senior to the one promoted subsequently. Explanation III.--Subject to the provisions of Rule 14 of those rules, a junior appointed to a higher grade shall be deemed to have superseded his senior only if both the junior and the senior were considered for the higher grade and the junior was appointed in preference to the senior. (2) The seniority of the two persons appointed by initial recruitment to the grade vis-a-vis those appointed otherwise shall be determined with reference to the date of continuous appointment to the grade: Provided that if two dates are the same, the person appointed otherwise shall rank senior to the person appointed by initial recruitment: Provided further that inter se seniority of persons belonging to same category will not be altered. Explanation.--In case a group of persons is selected for initial appointment at one time, the earliest date on which any one out of the group joined the service will be deemed to be the date of appointment of all persons in the group. Similarly in case of group of persons is appointed otherwise at one time in the same office order the earliest date on which any one out of the group joined the service will be deemed to be the date of appointment of all persons in the group. And the persons in each group will be placed with reference to the continuous date of appointment as a group in order of their inter se seniority. (3) Notwithstanding the provisions of this rule, the seniority lists already prepared in accordance with the rules applicable immediately before the commencement of these rules shall be construed as seniority lists for the respective now grades in respect of persons already in service and amendments therein shall continue to be made in accordance with those rules to settle inter se seniority disputes among them. Sub-clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of this rule is relevant in this case. According to this sub-rule inter se seniority of persons appointed otherwise than initial recruitment is to be determined with reference to the dates of their continuous appointment in the grade. Admittedly the appellant entered in Grade B-12 on 1-7-1985 in Civil Secretariat whereas respondents entered in the same grade on 1-7-1983. The selection authority did not care to take into account this seniority position of respondents and without considering the case of respondents for the higher grade promoted appellant as Senior Scale Stenographer in B-15. The appellant could not, in the circumstances claim a senior position to that of respondents Nos. 3 and 4. 8. Despite of our above view of the matter, we have to address the proposition as to whether the impugned order is sustainable in the eyes of law. The perusal of the record shows that respondents on 27-11-1991 addressed a letter to Accountant-General of Azad Jammu and Kashmir wherein they stated that the pay of appellant who is working in the Department of Law and Parliamentary Affairs has wrongly been fixed and requested for recovery of excess payment. The learned counsel for appellant has raised the point that the respondents have failed to challenge the order of promotion of the appellant. This order attained the finality and could not be disturbed by the Chief Secretary. Appellant was promoted vide Order No. 87/113/ (SHOBA-E-INTAZAMIA), dated 4-6-1987. The promotion was given effect from 2-4-1987. The learned counsel for respondents has replied that the order of promotion of appellant was made without any notice to them and they are not bound by it. The arguments of learned counsel for respondents could be sustained if the facts on the record prove that the respondents had no knowledge or notice of the order of promotion of appellant dated 4-6-1987. It is correct that the respondents were not considered along with the appellant and the order was made without considering their case but from their own letter dated 27-11-1991 addressed to Accountant-General of Azad Jammu and Kashmir it is clear that they had the knowledge that appellant Khani Zaman was performing his duties as Personal Assistant in the Department of Law and Parliamentary Affairs and this post carries the Pay Scale B-16. The appellant as Personal Assistant was in Grade B-16 and this was only possible if the appellant was previously placed in Grade B-15. The fact that the appellant was in Grade B-16 on 27-11-1991 the respondents must have known that he was in Grade B-15 before his appointment as Personal Assistant in Law Department. The order of promotion of appellant unless challenged and set aside by the competent appellant authority will continue to occupy the ground as a valid order. This order was passed by the Chief Secretary. Under the Appeal Rules the order could be challenged before the next higher Authority which in this case is the Prime Minister. Instead of approaching the competent authority the respondents pursued their case in form of miscellaneous applications before the Chief Secretary who was not competent to review his own order. If we reckoned the period from 27-11-1991 the appeal before the Prime Minister could be filed within sixty days of this date. We believe that the respondents have so far taken no step to get rid of the operation of the order of the promotion of appellant. This order, therefore, has attained finality and Chief Secretary was not competent to pass any order which could make the order of promotion of appellant as invalid and in operative. The Supreme Court of Azad Jammu and Kashmir in Civil Appeal No. 44 of 1993 entitled Rehmat Ullah Awan v. Azad Government and others has in the same set of facts held that the appellant allowed the seniority list to attain finality and, therefore, his appeal was rightly dismissed as time-barred by the Service Tribunal. Following the decision of the Supreme Court, we are of the view that respondents failed to challenge the order of promotion of appellant within time and in accordance with the channel available to the respondents to get the declaration of invalidity of the order from a competent forum. 9. In view of the above, we are of the opinion that the impugned order is liable to be set aside and we proceed to ordered accordingly with the directions that the seniority position of the appellant be restored as originally assigned in seniority list issued under No. Admin/S.O-IV/1Vi-360/90 dated 25-1-1990. We make no order as to costs. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem