EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark KRISHNA MEDICAL STORES and another vs INCOME TAX OFFICER and another Criminal Revisions Cases Nos. 627 and 628 and Criminal Revision Petitions Nos. 627 and 625 of 1990 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: KRISHNA MEDICAL STORES and another Respondant: INCOME TAX OFFICER and another Result: Order accordingly Judgment Date: 1992-02-25 Court: Andhra Paradesh High Court Judges: Eswara Prasad Citations Advocates Statutes 1995 P T D 283 206 I T R 76 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT ' The first petitioner in both the revisions is a firm. The second petitioner is a partner of the firm and in charge of its affairs. The petitioners are the accused Nos. 1 and 2 in C. C. No, 50 of 1987 on the file of the Court of the Special Judge for Economic Offences at Hyderabad, relating to the assessment year 1982-83, and in C.C. No, 51 of 1987 relating to the assessment year 1983-84, alongwith three others. They were charged with offences punishable under sections 276-C (1), 277 and 278 of the Income Tax Act, 1961. Pending trial, A-5 died. A-1 (the first petitioner) was found guilty under section 276-C; A-2 was found guilty under sections 277 and 276-C read with sections 278-D and was sentenced to pay a fine of Rs,1,000 in default to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one month. He was also sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for three months and was directed to pay a fine of Rs,1,000 in default to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one month on the second charge. A-3, another partner of the firm, was acquitted. A-4 was found guilty under section 278 and was sentenced to undergo imprisonment till the rising of the Court and to pay a fine of Rs,1,000, in both the matters by the learned Special Judge. ' Appeals filed by the petitioners and A-4 were partly allowed by the learned Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Hyderabad and the conviction of A-4 was set aside and he was acquitted. The convictions and sentences imposed on the petitioners were confirmed and their appeals were dismissed. These revisions arise out of the convictions and sentences imposed against the petitioners. ' The first petitioner-firm is an assessee under the Income Tax Act, 1961 ("the Act", for short). For the assessment year 1982-83, the firm returned an income of Rs,19,710 and for the assessment year 1983-84, Rs,21,080. The said returns were signed and verified by the second petitioner. The Income Tax Officer found that the debit amount made in the names of two brothers of the second petitioner, namely G. Ramarao and G. Mallikharjunarao, towards their remuneration is not allowable, as they were not employees of the firm. He included the debit amount in the income of the first petitioner-firm. Appeals were preferred against the orders of the Income-tax Officer and they were dismissed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, confirming the assessment orders. The firm filed appeals before the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal which were partly allowed. The learned Special Judge as well as the learned Metropolitan Sessions Judge held that only accused No, 4, the father of the second petitioner, was rendering assistance to the firm and that the brothers, G. Ramarao and G. Mallikharjunarao, did not render any assistance at all. ' Sri Venkataiah, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners, firstly contended that both the Courts have not properly considered the effect of Exh.P-10, which clearly shows that the second petitioner asserted that his father and brother were assisting the firm by making purchases after verifying the stock position at the time of booking orders and were also assisting in making sales. He further contended that the Courts below ignored the income-tax returns submitted by Messrs. Ramarao and Mallikharjunarao showing their income from salaries paid by the first petitioner firm, though the said statements were accepted by the Department. The further submission of learned counsel is that the prosecution failed to establish mens rea on the part of the petitioners and without a finding that the petitioners have debited the amounts of salaries wilfully, the finding of guilt cannot be sustained. It is, therefore, necessary to notice the relevant provisions of the Act for the violation of which the petitioners were found guilty: "Section 276-C. (1) If a person wilfully attempts in any manner whatsoever to evade any tax, penalty or interest chargeable or imposable under this Act, he shall, without prejudice to any penalty that may be imposable on him under any other provision of this Act, be punishable:--- (2) If a person wilfully attempts in any manner whatsoever to evade the payment of any tax, penalty or interest under this Act, he shall, without prejudice to any penalty that may be imposable on him under any other provision of this Act, be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three months, but which may extend to three years and shall, in the discretion of the Court, also be liable to fine. ' Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, a pin attempt to evade any tat, penalty or interest chargeable or imposable under this Act or the payment thereof shall include a case where any person---makes or causes to be made any false entry or statement in such books of account or other documents; or wilfully omits or causes to be omitted any relevant entry or statement in such books of account or other documents ; or (iv) causes any other circumstance to exist which will have the effect of enabling such person to evade any tax, penalty or interest chargeable or imposable under this Act or the payment thereof. ' Section 277. If a person makes a statement in any verification under this Act or under any rule made thereunder, or delivers an account or statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false, or does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable.---" ' Section 278. If a person abets or induces in any manner another person to make and deliver an account or a statement or declaration relating to any income chargeable to tax which is false and which he either knows to be false or does not believe to be true or to commit an offence under subsection (1) of section 276-C, he shall be punishable,---" ' Section 278-B. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: ' Provided that nothing contained in this subsection shall render any such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence." ' As observed earlier, the first petitioner was found guilty of the offence punishable under section 276-C. The second petitioner was found guilty under section 277 of verifying the return and also under section 276-C read with section 278-B of the Act. From a reading of section 276-C, it is seen that, in order to be found guilty under the said provision, the accused person' must be found to have made wilful attempts to evade tax, penalty or interest. The Explanation to section 276-C enumerates instances of wilful attempts. Clause (iii) of the Explanation dealing with omission of any relevant entry or statement in account books or other documents, again refers to wilful omission. The allegation against the second petitioner was that he verified the income-tax returns which alone cannot be held to be wilful, unless positive evidence is let in to prove the state of mind of the second petitioner while filing the return. In other words, it has to be established by the prosecution that the second petitioner filed the return with an intention to evade tax. ' In order to bring home the guilt under section 277, it is necessary for the prosecution to prove that the accused either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true that the statement he makes or the verification he has made under the Act is false. Similarly, section 278 deals with abetment or inducement of a person to make and deliver an account or statement or declaration relating to any income chargeable to tax with the knowledge that it is false or that he does not believe to be true. The element of knowledge has to be proved by the prosecution in order to hold the accused person guilty of offence under section 278. ' Section 278-B deals with offences by companies and throws the burden of proof on the person in charge of the company to prove that the offence committed by the company was not with his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. In order to sustain conviction of the person in charge of the affairs of the company, it is necessary for the prosecution to first establish the guilt of the company and then the burden shifts to the person in charge of the company to prove that he did not have the knowledge of such offence and that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. ' In Thakasi Satyanarayana v. State of A. P. (1985) 153 ITR 818, this Court held that mere possession or control of books and documents containing false entries is not punishable under section 276-C, unless the prosecution establishes a wilful attempt on the part of the accused to evade tax and that it is essential that mens rea must be established. The learned Judge observed (headnote): ' That it was not difficult to visualize that a person could come into possession of books of account containing false entries or statements without knowledge of the same. The requisite mens rea, viz., knowledge on the part of a person of a false entry or statement in any books of account or other documents in his possession or control, must be established before he is sought to be visited with the penalty prescribed by section 276-C." ' This Court had an occasion to consider the meaning of the word "wilful" while dealing with section 276-CC of the Act in ITO v. Autofil (1990) 184 ITR 47. It was held that the word "wilful" generally means an act done with a bad purpose, with an evil motive as a constituent element of the crime and that it should be established beyond all reasonable doubt and there should be presence of mens rea, a bad motive and a guilty mind. Dealing with section 276-C, the Supreme Court in Gujarat Travancore Agency v. CIT (1989) 177 ITR 455, held that (at page 457): "There can be no dispute that having regard to the provisions of section 276-C, which speaks of wilful failure on the part of the defaulter and taking into consideration the nature of the penalty, which is punitive, no sentence can be imposed under that provision unless the element of mens rea is established. In most cases of criminal liability, the intention of the Legislature is that the penalty should serve as a deterrent." ' A Division Bench of this Court in Addl. CIT v. Burugupalli China Krishnamurthy [1980] 121 ITR 326, held that even in the case of penalty proceedings, which are penal in nature, the onus is on the Department to show that a particular receipt or amount is of revenue nature and merely because the explanation offered by the assessee has been found to be false, it is no ground for imposition of penalty. The cumulative effect or the entirety of the circumstances of the case should lead to the only reasonable inference that the amount in question represents income and that the assessee had concealed the particulars of his income or had deliberately furnished inaccurate particulars thereof should be considered. Where there is no positive evidence of concealment, no penalty is imposable. The Rajasthan High Court in Shree Singhvi Brothers v. Union of India [19911 187 ITR 219, held that a partnership firm cannot be prosecuted 'for offences under sections 276-C, 277 and 278, inasmuch as, for the commission of the offence to evade any tax or penalty a minimum sentence has been provided for in the statute. It was further held that, for the commission of offence, mens rea is an essential ingredient and the company being a juristic personality, cannot have any mens rea to commit any offence. It is only the partners of the firm or the directors of the company who can be held to be guilty by making false statements. I am in entire agreement with the view expressed as above. ' From the legal position emerging out of the above decisions, it is necessary to examine the facts of the case. The contention of the petitioners is that the brothers of A-2, namely, G. Ramarao and G. Mallikarjunarao, rendered assistance to the firm for which they were paid remuneration. The hierarchy in the Department rejected the plea of the petitioners. It is, therefore, essential to see whether there is mens rea present in the mind of the second petitioner when he submitted the returns to evade payment of tax by making false claims based on debit entries. Exh. P-1 clearly shows that the second petitioner had asserted that his brothers assisted the firm in the business in making purchases after verifying the stock position at the time of booking orders and also assisted in making sales. Exhs. D-1 to D-8 also show that the receipt of remuneration by the said two persons was reflected in their income-tax returns which were accepted by the authorities. In such circumstances, no inference can be drawn that mens rea was present in the mind of the second petitioner when he filed the returns. It is also to be noted that statement of the accountant was that he wrote the accounts at the instance of the father of the second petitioner, namely, A-4 and that it was not at the instance of the second petitioner. It has, therefore, to be held that, in the absence of any evidence adduced by the prosecution to show that there was a wilful attempt to evade tax or that the statement in the verification of the returns was with the knowledge that it is false, the convictions and sentences cannot be sustained. The convictions and sentences are, accordingly, set aside and the revisions are allowed. The fine paid by the petitioner will be refunded. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Andhra Paradesh High Court Judge(s): Eswara Prasad Title: KRISHNA MEDICAL STORES and another vs INCOME TAX OFFICER and another Case No.: Criminal Revisions Cases Nos. 627 and 628 and Criminal Revision Petitions Nos. 627 and 625 of 1990 Date of Judgment: 1992-02-25 Reported As: 1995 P T D 283 206 I T R 76 Result: Order accordingly Judgment JUDGMENT ' The first petitioner in both the revisions is a firm. The second petitioner is a partner of the firm and in charge of its affairs. The petitioners are the accused Nos. 1 and 2 in C. C. No, 50 of 1987 on the file of the Court of the Special Judge for Economic Offences at Hyderabad, relating to the assessment year 1982-83, and in C.C. No, 51 of 1987 relating to the assessment year 1983-84, alongwith three others. They were charged with offences punishable under sections 276-C (1), 277 and 278 of the Income Tax Act, 1961. Pending trial, A-5 died. A-1 (the first petitioner) was found guilty under section 276-C; A-2 was found guilty under sections 277 and 276-C read with sections 278-D and was sentenced to pay a fine of Rs,1,000 in default to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one month. He was also sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for three months and was directed to pay a fine of Rs,1,000 in default to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one month on the second charge. A-3, another partner of the firm, was acquitted. A-4 was found guilty under section 278 and was sentenced to undergo imprisonment till the rising of the Court and to pay a fine of Rs,1,000, in both the matters by the learned Special Judge. ' Appeals filed by the petitioners and A-4 were partly allowed by the learned Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Hyderabad and the conviction of A-4 was set aside and he was acquitted. The convictions and sentences imposed on the petitioners were confirmed and their appeals were dismissed. These revisions arise out of the convictions and sentences imposed against the petitioners. ' The first petitioner-firm is an assessee under the Income Tax Act, 1961 ("the Act", for short). For the assessment year 1982-83, the firm returned an income of Rs,19,710 and for the assessment year 1983-84, Rs,21,080. The said returns were signed and verified by the second petitioner. The Income Tax Officer found that the debit amount made in the names of two brothers of the second petitioner, namely G. Ramarao and G. Mallikharjunarao, towards their remuneration is not allowable, as they were not employees of the firm. He included the debit amount in the income of the first petitioner-firm. Appeals were preferred against the orders of the Income-tax Officer and they were dismissed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, confirming the assessment orders. The firm filed appeals before the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal which were partly allowed. The learned Special Judge as well as the learned Metropolitan Sessions Judge held that only accused No, 4, the father of the second petitioner, was rendering assistance to the firm and that the brothers, G. Ramarao and G. Mallikharjunarao, did not render any assistance at all. ' Sri Venkataiah, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners, firstly contended that both the Courts have not properly considered the effect of Exh.P-10, which clearly shows that the second petitioner asserted that his father and brother were assisting the firm by making purchases after verifying the stock position at the time of booking orders and were also assisting in making sales. He further contended that the Courts below ignored the income-tax returns submitted by Messrs. Ramarao and Mallikharjunarao showing their income from salaries paid by the first petitioner firm, though the said statements were accepted by the Department. The further submission of learned counsel is that the prosecution failed to establish mens rea on the part of the petitioners and without a finding that the petitioners have debited the amounts of salaries wilfully, the finding of guilt cannot be sustained. It is, therefore, necessary to notice the relevant provisions of the Act for the violation of which the petitioners were found guilty: "Section 276-C. (1) If a person wilfully attempts in any manner whatsoever to evade any tax, penalty or interest chargeable or imposable under this Act, he shall, without prejudice to any penalty that may be imposable on him under any other provision of this Act, be punishable:--- (2) If a person wilfully attempts in any manner whatsoever to evade the payment of any tax, penalty or interest under this Act, he shall, without prejudice to any penalty that may be imposable on him under any other provision of this Act, be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three months, but which may extend to three years and shall, in the discretion of the Court, also be liable to fine. ' Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, a pin attempt to evade any tat, penalty or interest chargeable or imposable under this Act or the payment thereof shall include a case where any person---makes or causes to be made any false entry or statement in such books of account or other documents; or wilfully omits or causes to be omitted any relevant entry or statement in such books of account or other documents ; or (iv) causes any other circumstance to exist which will have the effect of enabling such person to evade any tax, penalty or interest chargeable or imposable under this Act or the payment thereof. ' Section 277. If a person makes a statement in any verification under this Act or under any rule made thereunder, or delivers an account or statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false, or does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable.---" ' Section 278. If a person abets or induces in any manner another person to make and deliver an account or a statement or declaration relating to any income chargeable to tax which is false and which he either knows to be false or does not believe to be true or to commit an offence under subsection (1) of section 276-C, he shall be punishable,---" ' Section 278-B. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: ' Provided that nothing contained in this subsection shall render any such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence." ' As observed earlier, the first petitioner was found guilty of the offence punishable under section 276-C. The second petitioner was found guilty under section 277 of verifying the return and also under section 276-C read with section 278-B of the Act. From a reading of section 276-C, it is seen that, in order to be found guilty under the said provision, the accused person' must be found to have made wilful attempts to evade tax, penalty or interest. The Explanation to section 276-C enumerates instances of wilful attempts. Clause (iii) of the Explanation dealing with omission of any relevant entry or statement in account books or other documents, again refers to wilful omission. The allegation against the second petitioner was that he verified the income-tax returns which alone cannot be held to be wilful, unless positive evidence is let in to prove the state of mind of the second petitioner while filing the return. In other words, it has to be established by the prosecution that the second petitioner filed the return with an intention to evade tax. ' In order to bring home the guilt under section 277, it is necessary for the prosecution to prove that the accused either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true that the statement he makes or the verification he has made under the Act is false. Similarly, section 278 deals with abetment or inducement of a person to make and deliver an account or statement or declaration relating to any income chargeable to tax with the knowledge that it is false or that he does not believe to be true. The element of knowledge has to be proved by the prosecution in order to hold the accused person guilty of offence under section 278. ' Section 278-B deals with offences by companies and throws the burden of proof on the person in charge of the company to prove that the offence committed by the company was not with his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. In order to sustain conviction of the person in charge of the affairs of the company, it is necessary for the prosecution to first establish the guilt of the company and then the burden shifts to the person in charge of the company to prove that he did not have the knowledge of such offence and that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. ' In Thakasi Satyanarayana v. State of A. P. (1985) 153 ITR 818, this Court held that mere possession or control of books and documents containing false entries is not punishable under section 276-C, unless the prosecution establishes a wilful attempt on the part of the accused to evade tax and that it is essential that mens rea must be established. The learned Judge observed (headnote): ' That it was not difficult to visualize that a person could come into possession of books of account containing false entries or statements without knowledge of the same. The requisite mens rea, viz., knowledge on the part of a person of a false entry or statement in any books of account or other documents in his possession or control, must be established before he is sought to be visited with the penalty prescribed by section 276-C." ' This Court had an occasion to consider the meaning of the word "wilful" while dealing with section 276-CC of the Act in ITO v. Autofil (1990) 184 ITR 47. It was held that the word "wilful" generally means an act done with a bad purpose, with an evil motive as a constituent element of the crime and that it should be established beyond all reasonable doubt and there should be presence of mens rea, a bad motive and a guilty mind. Dealing with section 276-C, the Supreme Court in Gujarat Travancore Agency v. CIT (1989) 177 ITR 455, held that (at page 457): "There can be no dispute that having regard to the provisions of section 276-C, which speaks of wilful failure on the part of the defaulter and taking into consideration the nature of the penalty, which is punitive, no sentence can be imposed under that provision unless the element of mens rea is established. In most cases of criminal liability, the intention of the Legislature is that the penalty should serve as a deterrent." ' A Division Bench of this Court in Addl. CIT v. Burugupalli China Krishnamurthy [1980] 121 ITR 326, held that even in the case of penalty proceedings, which are penal in nature, the onus is on the Department to show that a particular receipt or amount is of revenue nature and merely because the explanation offered by the assessee has been found to be false, it is no ground for imposition of penalty. The cumulative effect or the entirety of the circumstances of the case should lead to the only reasonable inference that the amount in question represents income and that the assessee had concealed the particulars of his income or had deliberately furnished inaccurate particulars thereof should be considered. Where there is no positive evidence of concealment, no penalty is imposable. The Rajasthan High Court in Shree Singhvi Brothers v. Union of India [19911 187 ITR 219, held that a partnership firm cannot be prosecuted 'for offences under sections 276-C, 277 and 278, inasmuch as, for the commission of the offence to evade any tax or penalty a minimum sentence has been provided for in the statute. It was further held that, for the commission of offence, mens rea is an essential ingredient and the company being a juristic personality, cannot have any mens rea to commit any offence. It is only the partners of the firm or the directors of the company who can be held to be guilty by making false statements. I am in entire agreement with the view expressed as above. ' From the legal position emerging out of the above decisions, it is necessary to examine the facts of the case. The contention of the petitioners is that the brothers of A-2, namely, G. Ramarao and G. Mallikarjunarao, rendered assistance to the firm for which they were paid remuneration. The hierarchy in the Department rejected the plea of the petitioners. It is, therefore, essential to see whether there is mens rea present in the mind of the second petitioner when he submitted the returns to evade payment of tax by making false claims based on debit entries. Exh. P-1 clearly shows that the second petitioner had asserted that his brothers assisted the firm in the business in making purchases after verifying the stock position at the time of booking orders and also assisted in making sales. Exhs. D-1 to D-8 also show that the receipt of remuneration by the said two persons was reflected in their income-tax returns which were accepted by the authorities. In such circumstances, no inference can be drawn that mens rea was present in the mind of the second petitioner when he filed the returns. It is also to be noted that statement of the accountant was that he wrote the accounts at the instance of the father of the second petitioner, namely, A-4 and that it was not at the instance of the second petitioner. It has, therefore, to be held that, in the absence of any evidence adduced by the prosecution to show that there was a wilful attempt to evade tax or that the statement in the verification of the returns was with the knowledge that it is false, the convictions and sentences cannot be sustained. The convictions and sentences are, accordingly, set aside and the revisions are allowed. The fine paid by the petitioner will be refunded. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem