EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark M/S Habib Modaraba Management (Pvt.) Limited vs (1) Commissioner (Appeals), SRB, Karachi and (2) Assistant Commissioner (Unit-), SRB, Karachi APPEAL NO. AT-164/2015 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: M/S Habib Modaraba Management (Pvt.) Limited Respondant: (1) Commissioner (Appeals), SRB, Karachi and (2) Assistant Commissioner (Unit-), SRB, Karachi Result: Appeal dismissed Judgment Date: 2016-01-06 Court: Appellate Tribunal Sindh Revenue Board Judges: Razia Sultana Taher Citations Advocates Statutes 2016 SRB 48 Judgment Razia Sultana Taher This appeal has been filed by the Appellant challenging the Order-in-Appeal No.46/2013 dated 8 th October, 2013 passed by the Commissioner (Appeals) in appeal No.61/2012/appeals/SRB confirming the Order-in-Original No.94/2013 dated 23.05.2013 passed by the Assistant Commissioner, SRB. 2. In short, the facts of the case as stated m the Order-in-Original are that the Appellant provided / rendered management services including fund and assets management services falling under tariff heading 9824.0000 of the Second Schedule to the Sindh Sales Tax on Services Act, 7011 (hereinafter referred to as the Act'). The Financial statement of M/5 First Habib Modaraba for the year 2011.12 revealed that an amount of 95.4,089,409/. (eight months) had been paid to management company namely M/S Habib Modaraba Management (Pvt.) Ltd, as management fees on account of management services. In addition they also failed to e-file the Sales Tax returns for the tax period from July, 2011 to January, 2013. 3. The concerned Assistant Commissioner, in the said Order-in-Original No.94 of 2013 dated 23' May, 2013 observed and concluded that the description "management services including fund and asset management services" was included through the Sales Tax on Services (amendment) Ordinance, 2011 vide notification NO.PAS/Legis.1(14)/2011 dated November, 2011, and became taxable with effect from 1'' November, 2011. Consequently, management services provided by Modaraba Management Companies to the Modarabas are also chargeable to tax. The provisions of the Modaraba Ordinance show that a Modaraba and a Modaraba Company are separate legal person and separate corporate entities and a Modaraba Management company provides services of management to the Modaraba. The said order directed the appellant to deposit the amount of Rs.4,089,409/. (apportioned amount of 8 months of Rs.6,134.158/-) alongwith default surcharge under section 44 of 'the Act', (to be calculated at the time of payment), penalty of Rs.204,470/- (being 5% of the total amount payable) imposed as provided in section 43(3) for non-payment of sales tax, also a Penalty of Rs.15,000/. for non-filing of month sales tax returns for the tax periods from November, 2012 to January, 2013 @ Rs.S,000 per month under section 43(2) of 'the Act'. 4. The Commissioner (Appeals) in his order at paragraph 13 stated that —Modaraba Management Company' is dependent upon the 'Remuneration / Fee' that it receives from the 'Modaraba' as a consideration for its noted services. These two companies are not 'business partners' nor has the impugned 'Management Company' investor any 'capital of its own' in the Modaraba. "It is therefore totally incorrect and misleading to treat the impugned amount as some kind of 'profit sharing—. The Commissioner (Appeals) upheld the Order-in-Original but modified to the extent of deleting the imposition of penalty and default surcharge. 5. The appellant in the grounds of appeal and subsequent written and oral submissions, have stated as follows:' i) That the remuneration received is its share of profit and is not 'service charges'. "Thus such distribution of profits cannot be equated with any fee or charge in lieu of any service rendered by the appellant for managing the affairs of its Modaraba". ii) That no service is provided to First Habib Modaraba. Modaraba and its Management Company stands in partnership. Modaraba Management Company is an active partner, therefore entitled to share in profits earned by the Modaraba. iii) That the appellant receives no remuneration if its modaraba earns no profit. iv) That it is unlike conventional management of Unit Trust, Mutual Funds and Asset Management Company where the management fee for managing the funds is linked with the total assets size of funds regardless of the fact there is profit or loss, charge is fixed for the management services rendered by such Mutual Funds and Management Companies. v) That imposition of services sales tax on the profits of the Modaraba Management Company is against the concept of Sales Tax on Services. It contradicts the legal principle of 'quid pro quo' i.e. there can be no service without a definite consideration. Here, the Appellant manages the affairs of Modaraba whether or not there is profit, plus when there is no fixed consideration, business activities carried out by the appellant cannot be termed as ''service". vi) That respondent SRB is bound to act in accordance with the Constitution and Laws of Pakistan and any action contrary to the same is to be treated as void under Article 8 of the constitution. vii) That arguments by the appellant have been disagreed and maintained that the maximum of 10% of the profit of the Modaraba is 'remuneration' and not a share in profit. But respondent has admitted that when there is no remuneration, in that case no sales tax would be levied. This support the contention that it only receives a share in profit and no remuneration and thus not liable to pay sales tax. viii) The share from the profit of Modaraba is not by mutual consent. The law has decided the Appellant's share out of modaraba's profit of the same. Section.18 of the Ordinance reads as follows:- ix) "Remuneration of the Modaraba Company. The remuneration of a Modaraba Company in respect of Modaraba floated by it shall be fixed percentage of the net annual profit of the Modaraba and shall not exceed ten percent of such net annual profits computed in the manner to be prescribed." That under rule — 16 (3) of the Modaraba Companies and Modaraba Rules 1981 provides that the remuneration paid to the Modaraba Management Company shall be calculated on the basis of profit shown in the profit and loss account of the Modaraba. x) Cited order of the Appellate Tribunal, in appeal No.24/2014 dated 31.08.2015 in the case of M/s UDL Modaraba Management Company (Pvt.) Ltd. Versus Commissioner Appeals, SRB and another. Reproduced paragraphs 13 and 14 verbatim and stated that issue of this appeal has been decided in the said Order-in-Appeal. 6 In reply to the argument, respondent submitted that: i) The two companies are not in partnership and the impugned management company has not made investment of any capital. ii) The then tariff Heading 9824.0000 i.e. "management services including funds and assets management services" was included in the Second Schedule of the Act" through the Sindh Sales Tax on Services (amended) Ordinance 2011 vide notification No. PAS/Legis/11141/2011 dated 01.11.2011. Demand was raised in accordance with the Second Schedule of the Act, as Management Companies, became chargeable to tax. iii) The receipt of remuneration is not determinative of the nature of services rendered. iv) Section 2)1)(c) of the 'Ordinance' of Modaraba Companies and Floating Ordinance 1980 states "Modaraba Company means a company engaged in the business of floating and managing modaraba". (a) Section 4(1)(a) of the Act Economic Activity states that "an activity carried on the form of a business, including a profession , calling, trade or undertaking of any kind whether or not the activity is undertaken for profit. v) The Modaraba Management Company is providing management administrative services of floatation of modaraba and thereby earns management income / fees against the management services. It depends on the Modaraba, during the relevant tax period it Modaraba makes a profit, management fee will be received. vi) The appellant has applied the legal principle of 'quid pro quo' which means an "exchange of goods or services, where one transfer is contingent upon the other". There is an element of service, as Modaraba Company is involved in management of Modaraba against management fees. The fee so paid is an 'expense' of Modaraba and a 'income' for modaraba company. vii) Both Modaraba and Modaraba company are a separate legal entity. Section 12 of the Modaraba Ordinance reads as "Modaraba to be a legal person, (1) A modaraba shall sue and be sued in its own name through the modaraba company (2) The asset and liabilities of each modaraba shall be separate and distinct from those on another modaraba as also from those of the modaraba company. viii) Referred to letter addressed to then Member (Legal), received on behalf of NBFI and Modaraba Association of Pakistan dated 25' July, 2012. ix) The remuneration received does not represent the rendition of service. It is incumbent upon the management company to provide services. In case of profit they get the remuneration which cannot exceed 10% of the total profit earned by Modaraba. The remuneration does not affect the taxability of such services. Reference to section 5(a)(3) of 'the Act'. x) "The tariff 98.13 lists persons who services are taxable and includes services provided by Modaraba rather than Modaraba Company. Next tariff heading 9813.3900 of the Second Schedule of 'the Act' lists services which are provided by Modaraba in relation to Modaraba Financing, the same are exempted by notification SRB.Leg.(1)/2012 dated 08.03.2012. xi) Modaraba companies operate under Modaraba Companies and Modaraba (Floatation and Control) Ordinance, 1980 and Non-Banking Financial Institution (NBFI) operate under Non-Banking Finance Companies Regulations, 2008. The two institutions i.e. Modaraba Companies and NBFI are regulated by different laws thus fall under two different tariff heading 98.13 and 9824.0000 respectively. 7 I have heard the oral arguments of both sides and have perused the available record of the case. I have also gone through the relevant provisions of the law for the present purpose. From the perusal of the above, I have been able to frame the following three issues on facts and circumstances of the case (i) whether Modaraba and Modaraba Management Companies are one and the same entity? (ii) Whether in the transaction in question any service is being provided? If yes then, whether the services fall in the heading 9874.0000 of the Second Schedule of the Act, 2011. (iii) Subject to the issue Not and 2, whether, there accrues any incidence of tax when the management company's receiving remuneration from profit earned from such transactions. 8. I shall decide the above issues, one by one in sequence. The Modaraba company and Modaraba (Floatation and Control) Ordinance, 1980 (hereinafter referred to as 'Ordinance') at sub clause (ab) of clause 11) of Section 2 defines the term "Modaraba" and at sub clause (C) 01 clause (1) of Section 2, it defines "Modaraba Company". It will be appropriate to reproduce both the darition hereunder:' (ab) "Modaraba" means a business in which a person participates with his money and another with his efforts or skill or both his efforts and skills and shall include Unit Trusts and Mutual Funds by whatever name called. (b) "Modarba Company' means a company engaged in business of floating and managing modaraba" 9 Plain reading of the above provisions shows that modaraba and modaraba management are separately defined-By its constitution the modaraba is such that there is "Rab-ul-Mar and a 'Modaraba' and whereas the modaraba company is meant and established for floatation and management of Modaraba. Under Section 4 "a modaraba company has to register as Modaraba. Company before the Registrar of Modaraba Companies. Available on record is a copy of Certificate of Incorporation. Memorandum and Articles of Association of the appellant under which they are a private Ltd. company registered under the Companies Ordinance, 1984 in the name of M/S 'Habib Modaraba Management (Pot) Limited' the term 'person' has been defined in sub clause (b) of clause 63 of Section 2 of the Act. 2011, to mean a company, an agency or an association of person formed, organized or established in Pakistan or elsewhere. The bare study of the above provisions would show that the appellant is an independent legal person / person under the 'Ordinance' and also under 'the Act', 2011. Being a private limited company and a modaraba company established under the 'Ordinance' the appellant has its own rights and liabilities. In case of modaraba. the 'Ordinance' at Section 12 terms modaraba as a legal person, it can sue and be sued in its own name and the assets and liabilities of each modaraba shall be separate and distinct from those of another modaraba as also from those of a modaraba company. In such a case it becomes abundantly clear that both are separate legal entities and have distinct and separate rights and liabilities, therefore, in view of the above. I have no doubt that wodarba and Modarba Management Companies are not one and the same entity 10. Now coming to the first part of the 2" issue, here the definition of term 'service or services' is required to be seen. In this regard, it shall appropriate to reproduce the then definition as under section 2(79) of the Act, 2011 which reads as follows:. "Service" or "Services" means anything which is not goods or providing of winch is not a supply of goods and shall include but not limited to the services listed in the first Schedule of this Act. Explanation:- A service shall remain and continue to be treated as service regardless whether or not the providing thereof involves any use, supply or consumption of any goods either as an essential or as an incidental aspect of such providing of service. 11. In this regard I shall recall that the appellant had submitted during his arguments that he is acting as partner and the profit earned on such business is shared by the appellant with the modaraba. It will be seen that I have already addressed the issue (a) and held that these two are separate entities and there is no share in the dividends of the Appellant company for modaraba. Modaraba is neither a partner as recognized under the companies Ordinance, 1984, the 'Ordinance' nor have any common rights and liabilities. Now a question arises, 'what does Modaraba Management Company do'? under the 'Ordinance', a modaraba company is established for management, control and floatation of a modaraba which is armless and legless body in view whereof, the 'Ordinance' details what is being done by modaraba company for modaraba. In this regard section 18 is also very important. Under Section 18, the appellant receives remuneration against such management, control and floatation of the modaraba's funds and assets. The term remuneration has been defined at Merriam Webster.com as an amount of money paid to someone for the work that person has done. Another dictionary the lawdictionary.com defines the terms remuneration as reward, recompense, salary and also as the remuneration means a "quid pro quo" i.e. something for something. the study and discussion will show that the modaraba company is not a partner and is not receiving any share in the profits, but is a service provider carrying out an economic activity as per section 4 of the Act, 2011. Against such services, as stipulated by Section 18, the appellant receives a remuneration / consideration section 5 of the Act, 2011 speaks about the value of taxable services, subsection (a) says that a consideration in money shall be value of taxable services. 12. The above discussion shows that all the necessary elements for constituting the service are present in the case in hand. Now, the next part of the issue is that whether the service falls under the then tariff heading 9824.0000 and are the management services in the nature. In this regard it will be appropriate to reproduce the tariff heading 9824.0000 of the Second Schedule of 'the Act'. Tariff heading Description Rate of tax "9824.0000 Management services including funds 16% And asset management" It will be seen that the entry starts with words management services, thereafter, the word 'including' has been used. Description further reads as "funds and assets management". The description has not been defined in the act, therefore the meanings of the word used therein shall be seen from the dictionary meaning and meaning at common parlance. 13. In this regard, the word 'management' and 'manage' are required to be looked into. The words "manage" and "management" has been defined in the Black's law Dictionary in Tenth Edition as under: "manage" — to exercise executive, administrative and supervisory powers, to control, carry or supervise. to regulate or administer a use or expenditure "management" the people in an organization who are vested with a certain amount of description and independent judgment in managing its affairs. 14. Apparently, the appellant had exercised executive, administrative and supervisory control over the affairs of the modaraba. Now, what were the affairs of the modaraba in this case. Modaraba as commonly known, has funds and may also have the assets. Such funds are available as pool funds. It is not out of content to explain that an Assets Management Company (AMC) is a company that invests its client is pooled fund into securities that match its declared financial objectives. Assets Management Companies provide investors with more diversification and investing options than they would have by themselves Even the assets are available under control of the management company. Now, this finding of services being the management services is required to be seen and read with the 'Ordinance'. 15. The preamble of the 'Ordinance' reads as has been used to provide for matters relating to registration of modaraba companies and the floatation, management and regulation of modaraba and for matters connected therewith or ancillary thereto. The 'Ordinance' is to be called by "Modaraba Companies and Modaraba (floatation and Control) Ordinance, 1980". 16. The core function of the modaraba company covered in Section 13 and 14 of the Ordinance induces. investment of the funds, undertaking of a business, transfer of shares by, promoterS, sponsors, holding controlling interests, preservation of assets and other matters relating to the mode of "management" and "distribution of profits", expenses relating to the management of the "modaraba fund". It also has to issue modaraba Certificates, maintain a register of holder of modaraba Certificates maintain separate bank accounts, funds, assets and liabilities of each modaraba and has to prepare and circulate to the holders of modaraba certificates, annual balance sheet and profit and loss account 17. In view of the discussion above, the words used by the legislature, the flow of conferred responsibilities and nature and sequence of the activity taking place in the transaction in hand very clearly and explicitly brings up that by no stretch of interpretation and imagination, the services of modaraba company to the modaraba be brought out the ambit of the then entry 9824.0000. I am very clear in my mind that such are in their nature management services, when the modaraba company manages the affairs of modaraba, and such are fund and asset management services, when the management company manages funds and assets of modaraba. Here, I further make it clear and hold that the arrangement between the modaraba company and the modaraba cannot be termed as modaraba, for the reason that the own laws / Ordinance under which the modaraba and modaraba companies are created and functioning do not recognize the modaraba company to be a modaraba. 18. Having decided the case as above. I will also discuss the Order passed by the Single Bench of Appellate Tribunal, Sindh Revenue Board i.e. the Honorable Member Judicial / Chairman, Appellate Tribunal, Sindh Revenue Board in the case of M/s UDC Modaraba v/s SRB. The first thing which needs attention is that chapter 98.13 lists certain institutions and thereunder lists certain services against sub tariff headings at 9813.9000. there are following tariff heading regarding modaraba and musharika and modaraba management companies. i) 9813.3900 . services rendered in respect of modaraba and musharika financing. ii) 9813.8100 Others, including the services provided or rendered by Non-Banking Financial Companies, Modaraba and Musharka Companies and other financial institutions. 19. The modaraba and musharika may acquire services for the purpose of financing of their profit earned through the management of the funds or assets by a modaraba company. Such services are exempt under the notification SRB Legal(1) dated 1 st July, 2011. And with utmost respect and regard, the Honorable Member Judicial has not considered fact that the arrangement in case of Modaraba Financing is not the arrangement as that of the Modaraba and Modaraba Management Company. As far as the heading 9813.8100 is concerned it includes the services by Modaraba and Musharika Companies to the extent of chapter 98.13 only and it does not extend to other independent or dependent sub headings of Second Schedule. In here what was required to be seen was for the purpose of determining a service, its nature of transaction and not the fact that where name of the institution appears. Under Section 3 of 'the Act', 2011, the services listed in the Second Schedule arc taxable. The Second Schedule also mentions on the face of it the connotation (taxable services] and ask to see Section 3 and 8 of the Act, 2011. 20. Therefore, if a service is listed in a taxable schedule than there is no exception that whether an institution is listed / mentioned in the Schedule or not. 21. Every person who is covered under the definition contained at clause /3 of Section 2 of the Act, 7011 shall have to pay the tax on the services listed on the schedule without exception. 22. In this regard recently the Full Bench of Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan has given a judgment in the case of M/s Habib Safe Deposit Vault (Pvt.) Limited v/s SRB. The Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan has also taken the same view and held as under “The appellant comes within the phrase -other persons' or mentioned in tariff heading 98.13 and provides services of safe deposit lockers / safe vault to its customers. Ike said tariff heading 98.13 also prescribes o rote of fox (15%). Therefore, the appellant is liable to pay sales tax at such rote on the services that it provides. However, the learned Bench of the High Court had brought the appellant into the soles tax net by holding, "that petitioner being o port of banking company Habib Bank Limited is liable to pay sales tax" and that "banking companies would be liable to pay sales tax on rendering these ten services", which includes the service of safe deposit locker and safe vault respectively under tariff subheading 9813.49(X and 9813.4910. The learned counsel has successfully dispelled the assumption that the appellant is a banking company, but as stored above this fact in itself would not exclude the liability of the appellant to pay sales tax". Therefore in view of the above position of law and facts. I with utmost respect disagree with the findings of the Honorable Chairman / Member Judicial recorded at paras 14 and 15 wherein the order for taxing the modaraba company was set aside. I accordingly hold that the services of a modaraba company are in their nature 'Management services including Funds and Assets management services' and the appellant is liable to pay the tax on the remuneration received. 79. In view of the foregoing discussion, I do not find any reason to interfere with the Order-in- Appeal. 26. The appeal has no merits and accordingly dismissed. (RAZIA SULTANA TAHER) MEMBER TECHNICAL Karachi Oared : 11.01.2016 Copies supplied to:. 1. The Appellant through authorized Representative. 2. The Assistant Commissioner (Unit- I), SRB, Karachi. Copy for information to :- 3) The Commissioner (Appeals). SRB, Karachi. 4) The Deputy Commissioner (Legal), SRB, Karachi. 5) Office copy 6) Guard file. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Appellate Tribunal Sindh Revenue Board Judge(s): Razia Sultana Taher Title: M/S Habib Modaraba Management (Pvt.) Limited vs (1) Commissioner (Appeals), SRB, Karachi and (2) Assistant Commissioner (Unit-), SRB, Karachi Case No.: APPEAL NO. AT-164/2015 Date of Judgment: 2016-01-06 Reported As: 2016 SRB 48 Result: Appeal dismissed Judgment Razia Sultana Taher This appeal has been filed by the Appellant challenging the Order-in-Appeal No.46/2013 dated 8 th October, 2013 passed by the Commissioner (Appeals) in appeal No.61/2012/appeals/SRB confirming the Order-in-Original No.94/2013 dated 23.05.2013 passed by the Assistant Commissioner, SRB. 2. In short, the facts of the case as stated m the Order-in-Original are that the Appellant provided / rendered management services including fund and assets management services falling under tariff heading 9824.0000 of the Second Schedule to the Sindh Sales Tax on Services Act, 7011 (hereinafter referred to as the Act'). The Financial statement of M/5 First Habib Modaraba for the year 2011.12 revealed that an amount of 95.4,089,409/. (eight months) had been paid to management company namely M/S Habib Modaraba Management (Pvt.) Ltd, as management fees on account of management services. In addition they also failed to e-file the Sales Tax returns for the tax period from July, 2011 to January, 2013. 3. The concerned Assistant Commissioner, in the said Order-in-Original No.94 of 2013 dated 23' May, 2013 observed and concluded that the description "management services including fund and asset management services" was included through the Sales Tax on Services (amendment) Ordinance, 2011 vide notification NO.PAS/Legis.1(14)/2011 dated November, 2011, and became taxable with effect from 1'' November, 2011. Consequently, management services provided by Modaraba Management Companies to the Modarabas are also chargeable to tax. The provisions of the Modaraba Ordinance show that a Modaraba and a Modaraba Company are separate legal person and separate corporate entities and a Modaraba Management company provides services of management to the Modaraba. The said order directed the appellant to deposit the amount of Rs.4,089,409/. (apportioned amount of 8 months of Rs.6,134.158/-) alongwith default surcharge under section 44 of 'the Act', (to be calculated at the time of payment), penalty of Rs.204,470/- (being 5% of the total amount payable) imposed as provided in section 43(3) for non-payment of sales tax, also a Penalty of Rs.15,000/. for non-filing of month sales tax returns for the tax periods from November, 2012 to January, 2013 @ Rs.S,000 per month under section 43(2) of 'the Act'. 4. The Commissioner (Appeals) in his order at paragraph 13 stated that —Modaraba Management Company' is dependent upon the 'Remuneration / Fee' that it receives from the 'Modaraba' as a consideration for its noted services. These two companies are not 'business partners' nor has the impugned 'Management Company' investor any 'capital of its own' in the Modaraba. "It is therefore totally incorrect and misleading to treat the impugned amount as some kind of 'profit sharing—. The Commissioner (Appeals) upheld the Order-in-Original but modified to the extent of deleting the imposition of penalty and default surcharge. 5. The appellant in the grounds of appeal and subsequent written and oral submissions, have stated as follows:' i) That the remuneration received is its share of profit and is not 'service charges'. "Thus such distribution of profits cannot be equated with any fee or charge in lieu of any service rendered by the appellant for managing the affairs of its Modaraba". ii) That no service is provided to First Habib Modaraba. Modaraba and its Management Company stands in partnership. Modaraba Management Company is an active partner, therefore entitled to share in profits earned by the Modaraba. iii) That the appellant receives no remuneration if its modaraba earns no profit. iv) That it is unlike conventional management of Unit Trust, Mutual Funds and Asset Management Company where the management fee for managing the funds is linked with the total assets size of funds regardless of the fact there is profit or loss, charge is fixed for the management services rendered by such Mutual Funds and Management Companies. v) That imposition of services sales tax on the profits of the Modaraba Management Company is against the concept of Sales Tax on Services. It contradicts the legal principle of 'quid pro quo' i.e. there can be no service without a definite consideration. Here, the Appellant manages the affairs of Modaraba whether or not there is profit, plus when there is no fixed consideration, business activities carried out by the appellant cannot be termed as ''service". vi) That respondent SRB is bound to act in accordance with the Constitution and Laws of Pakistan and any action contrary to the same is to be treated as void under Article 8 of the constitution. vii) That arguments by the appellant have been disagreed and maintained that the maximum of 10% of the profit of the Modaraba is 'remuneration' and not a share in profit. But respondent has admitted that when there is no remuneration, in that case no sales tax would be levied. This support the contention that it only receives a share in profit and no remuneration and thus not liable to pay sales tax. viii) The share from the profit of Modaraba is not by mutual consent. The law has decided the Appellant's share out of modaraba's profit of the same. Section.18 of the Ordinance reads as follows:- ix) "Remuneration of the Modaraba Company. The remuneration of a Modaraba Company in respect of Modaraba floated by it shall be fixed percentage of the net annual profit of the Modaraba and shall not exceed ten percent of such net annual profits computed in the manner to be prescribed." That under rule — 16 (3) of the Modaraba Companies and Modaraba Rules 1981 provides that the remuneration paid to the Modaraba Management Company shall be calculated on the basis of profit shown in the profit and loss account of the Modaraba. x) Cited order of the Appellate Tribunal, in appeal No.24/2014 dated 31.08.2015 in the case of M/s UDL Modaraba Management Company (Pvt.) Ltd. Versus Commissioner Appeals, SRB and another. Reproduced paragraphs 13 and 14 verbatim and stated that issue of this appeal has been decided in the said Order-in-Appeal. 6 In reply to the argument, respondent submitted that: i) The two companies are not in partnership and the impugned management company has not made investment of any capital. ii) The then tariff Heading 9824.0000 i.e. "management services including funds and assets management services" was included in the Second Schedule of the Act" through the Sindh Sales Tax on Services (amended) Ordinance 2011 vide notification No. PAS/Legis/11141/2011 dated 01.11.2011. Demand was raised in accordance with the Second Schedule of the Act, as Management Companies, became chargeable to tax. iii) The receipt of remuneration is not determinative of the nature of services rendered. iv) Section 2)1)(c) of the 'Ordinance' of Modaraba Companies and Floating Ordinance 1980 states "Modaraba Company means a company engaged in the business of floating and managing modaraba". (a) Section 4(1)(a) of the Act Economic Activity states that "an activity carried on the form of a business, including a profession , calling, trade or undertaking of any kind whether or not the activity is undertaken for profit. v) The Modaraba Management Company is providing management administrative services of floatation of modaraba and thereby earns management income / fees against the management services. It depends on the Modaraba, during the relevant tax period it Modaraba makes a profit, management fee will be received. vi) The appellant has applied the legal principle of 'quid pro quo' which means an "exchange of goods or services, where one transfer is contingent upon the other". There is an element of service, as Modaraba Company is involved in management of Modaraba against management fees. The fee so paid is an 'expense' of Modaraba and a 'income' for modaraba company. vii) Both Modaraba and Modaraba company are a separate legal entity. Section 12 of the Modaraba Ordinance reads as "Modaraba to be a legal person, (1) A modaraba shall sue and be sued in its own name through the modaraba company (2) The asset and liabilities of each modaraba shall be separate and distinct from those on another modaraba as also from those of the modaraba company. viii) Referred to letter addressed to then Member (Legal), received on behalf of NBFI and Modaraba Association of Pakistan dated 25' July, 2012. ix) The remuneration received does not represent the rendition of service. It is incumbent upon the management company to provide services. In case of profit they get the remuneration which cannot exceed 10% of the total profit earned by Modaraba. The remuneration does not affect the taxability of such services. Reference to section 5(a)(3) of 'the Act'. x) "The tariff 98.13 lists persons who services are taxable and includes services provided by Modaraba rather than Modaraba Company. Next tariff heading 9813.3900 of the Second Schedule of 'the Act' lists services which are provided by Modaraba in relation to Modaraba Financing, the same are exempted by notification SRB.Leg.(1)/2012 dated 08.03.2012. xi) Modaraba companies operate under Modaraba Companies and Modaraba (Floatation and Control) Ordinance, 1980 and Non-Banking Financial Institution (NBFI) operate under Non-Banking Finance Companies Regulations, 2008. The two institutions i.e. Modaraba Companies and NBFI are regulated by different laws thus fall under two different tariff heading 98.13 and 9824.0000 respectively. 7 I have heard the oral arguments of both sides and have perused the available record of the case. I have also gone through the relevant provisions of the law for the present purpose. From the perusal of the above, I have been able to frame the following three issues on facts and circumstances of the case (i) whether Modaraba and Modaraba Management Companies are one and the same entity? (ii) Whether in the transaction in question any service is being provided? If yes then, whether the services fall in the heading 9874.0000 of the Second Schedule of the Act, 2011. (iii) Subject to the issue Not and 2, whether, there accrues any incidence of tax when the management company's receiving remuneration from profit earned from such transactions. 8. I shall decide the above issues, one by one in sequence. The Modaraba company and Modaraba (Floatation and Control) Ordinance, 1980 (hereinafter referred to as 'Ordinance') at sub clause (ab) of clause 11) of Section 2 defines the term "Modaraba" and at sub clause (C) 01 clause (1) of Section 2, it defines "Modaraba Company". It will be appropriate to reproduce both the darition hereunder:' (ab) "Modaraba" means a business in which a person participates with his money and another with his efforts or skill or both his efforts and skills and shall include Unit Trusts and Mutual Funds by whatever name called. (b) "Modarba Company' means a company engaged in business of floating and managing modaraba" 9 Plain reading of the above provisions shows that modaraba and modaraba management are separately defined-By its constitution the modaraba is such that there is "Rab-ul-Mar and a 'Modaraba' and whereas the modaraba company is meant and established for floatation and management of Modaraba. Under Section 4 "a modaraba company has to register as Modaraba. Company before the Registrar of Modaraba Companies. Available on record is a copy of Certificate of Incorporation. Memorandum and Articles of Association of the appellant under which they are a private Ltd. company registered under the Companies Ordinance, 1984 in the name of M/S 'Habib Modaraba Management (Pot) Limited' the term 'person' has been defined in sub clause (b) of clause 63 of Section 2 of the Act. 2011, to mean a company, an agency or an association of person formed, organized or established in Pakistan or elsewhere. The bare study of the above provisions would show that the appellant is an independent legal person / person under the 'Ordinance' and also under 'the Act', 2011. Being a private limited company and a modaraba company established under the 'Ordinance' the appellant has its own rights and liabilities. In case of modaraba. the 'Ordinance' at Section 12 terms modaraba as a legal person, it can sue and be sued in its own name and the assets and liabilities of each modaraba shall be separate and distinct from those of another modaraba as also from those of a modaraba company. In such a case it becomes abundantly clear that both are separate legal entities and have distinct and separate rights and liabilities, therefore, in view of the above. I have no doubt that wodarba and Modarba Management Companies are not one and the same entity 10. Now coming to the first part of the 2" issue, here the definition of term 'service or services' is required to be seen. In this regard, it shall appropriate to reproduce the then definition as under section 2(79) of the Act, 2011 which reads as follows:. "Service" or "Services" means anything which is not goods or providing of winch is not a supply of goods and shall include but not limited to the services listed in the first Schedule of this Act. Explanation:- A service shall remain and continue to be treated as service regardless whether or not the providing thereof involves any use, supply or consumption of any goods either as an essential or as an incidental aspect of such providing of service. 11. In this regard I shall recall that the appellant had submitted during his arguments that he is acting as partner and the profit earned on such business is shared by the appellant with the modaraba. It will be seen that I have already addressed the issue (a) and held that these two are separate entities and there is no share in the dividends of the Appellant company for modaraba. Modaraba is neither a partner as recognized under the companies Ordinance, 1984, the 'Ordinance' nor have any common rights and liabilities. Now a question arises, 'what does Modaraba Management Company do'? under the 'Ordinance', a modaraba company is established for management, control and floatation of a modaraba which is armless and legless body in view whereof, the 'Ordinance' details what is being done by modaraba company for modaraba. In this regard section 18 is also very important. Under Section 18, the appellant receives remuneration against such management, control and floatation of the modaraba's funds and assets. The term remuneration has been defined at Merriam Webster.com as an amount of money paid to someone for the work that person has done. Another dictionary the lawdictionary.com defines the terms remuneration as reward, recompense, salary and also as the remuneration means a "quid pro quo" i.e. something for something. the study and discussion will show that the modaraba company is not a partner and is not receiving any share in the profits, but is a service provider carrying out an economic activity as per section 4 of the Act, 2011. Against such services, as stipulated by Section 18, the appellant receives a remuneration / consideration section 5 of the Act, 2011 speaks about the value of taxable services, subsection (a) says that a consideration in money shall be value of taxable services. 12. The above discussion shows that all the necessary elements for constituting the service are present in the case in hand. Now, the next part of the issue is that whether the service falls under the then tariff heading 9824.0000 and are the management services in the nature. In this regard it will be appropriate to reproduce the tariff heading 9824.0000 of the Second Schedule of 'the Act'. Tariff heading Description Rate of tax "9824.0000 Management services including funds 16% And asset management" It will be seen that the entry starts with words management services, thereafter, the word 'including' has been used. Description further reads as "funds and assets management". The description has not been defined in the act, therefore the meanings of the word used therein shall be seen from the dictionary meaning and meaning at common parlance. 13. In this regard, the word 'management' and 'manage' are required to be looked into. The words "manage" and "management" has been defined in the Black's law Dictionary in Tenth Edition as under: "manage" — to exercise executive, administrative and supervisory powers, to control, carry or supervise. to regulate or administer a use or expenditure "management" the people in an organization who are vested with a certain amount of description and independent judgment in managing its affairs. 14. Apparently, the appellant had exercised executive, administrative and supervisory control over the affairs of the modaraba. Now, what were the affairs of the modaraba in this case. Modaraba as commonly known, has funds and may also have the assets. Such funds are available as pool funds. It is not out of content to explain that an Assets Management Company (AMC) is a company that invests its client is pooled fund into securities that match its declared financial objectives. Assets Management Companies provide investors with more diversification and investing options than they would have by themselves Even the assets are available under control of the management company. Now, this finding of services being the management services is required to be seen and read with the 'Ordinance'. 15. The preamble of the 'Ordinance' reads as has been used to provide for matters relating to registration of modaraba companies and the floatation, management and regulation of modaraba and for matters connected therewith or ancillary thereto. The 'Ordinance' is to be called by "Modaraba Companies and Modaraba (floatation and Control) Ordinance, 1980". 16. The core function of the modaraba company covered in Section 13 and 14 of the Ordinance induces. investment of the funds, undertaking of a business, transfer of shares by, promoterS, sponsors, holding controlling interests, preservation of assets and other matters relating to the mode of "management" and "distribution of profits", expenses relating to the management of the "modaraba fund". It also has to issue modaraba Certificates, maintain a register of holder of modaraba Certificates maintain separate bank accounts, funds, assets and liabilities of each modaraba and has to prepare and circulate to the holders of modaraba certificates, annual balance sheet and profit and loss account 17. In view of the discussion above, the words used by the legislature, the flow of conferred responsibilities and nature and sequence of the activity taking place in the transaction in hand very clearly and explicitly brings up that by no stretch of interpretation and imagination, the services of modaraba company to the modaraba be brought out the ambit of the then entry 9824.0000. I am very clear in my mind that such are in their nature management services, when the modaraba company manages the affairs of modaraba, and such are fund and asset management services, when the management company manages funds and assets of modaraba. Here, I further make it clear and hold that the arrangement between the modaraba company and the modaraba cannot be termed as modaraba, for the reason that the own laws / Ordinance under which the modaraba and modaraba companies are created and functioning do not recognize the modaraba company to be a modaraba. 18. Having decided the case as above. I will also discuss the Order passed by the Single Bench of Appellate Tribunal, Sindh Revenue Board i.e. the Honorable Member Judicial / Chairman, Appellate Tribunal, Sindh Revenue Board in the case of M/s UDC Modaraba v/s SRB. The first thing which needs attention is that chapter 98.13 lists certain institutions and thereunder lists certain services against sub tariff headings at 9813.9000. there are following tariff heading regarding modaraba and musharika and modaraba management companies. i) 9813.3900 . services rendered in respect of modaraba and musharika financing. ii) 9813.8100 Others, including the services provided or rendered by Non-Banking Financial Companies, Modaraba and Musharka Companies and other financial institutions. 19. The modaraba and musharika may acquire services for the purpose of financing of their profit earned through the management of the funds or assets by a modaraba company. Such services are exempt under the notification SRB Legal(1) dated 1 st July, 2011. And with utmost respect and regard, the Honorable Member Judicial has not considered fact that the arrangement in case of Modaraba Financing is not the arrangement as that of the Modaraba and Modaraba Management Company. As far as the heading 9813.8100 is concerned it includes the services by Modaraba and Musharika Companies to the extent of chapter 98.13 only and it does not extend to other independent or dependent sub headings of Second Schedule. In here what was required to be seen was for the purpose of determining a service, its nature of transaction and not the fact that where name of the institution appears. Under Section 3 of 'the Act', 2011, the services listed in the Second Schedule arc taxable. The Second Schedule also mentions on the face of it the connotation (taxable services] and ask to see Section 3 and 8 of the Act, 2011. 20. Therefore, if a service is listed in a taxable schedule than there is no exception that whether an institution is listed / mentioned in the Schedule or not. 21. Every person who is covered under the definition contained at clause /3 of Section 2 of the Act, 7011 shall have to pay the tax on the services listed on the schedule without exception. 22. In this regard recently the Full Bench of Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan has given a judgment in the case of M/s Habib Safe Deposit Vault (Pvt.) Limited v/s SRB. The Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan has also taken the same view and held as under “The appellant comes within the phrase -other persons' or mentioned in tariff heading 98.13 and provides services of safe deposit lockers / safe vault to its customers. Ike said tariff heading 98.13 also prescribes o rote of fox (15%). Therefore, the appellant is liable to pay sales tax at such rote on the services that it provides. However, the learned Bench of the High Court had brought the appellant into the soles tax net by holding, "that petitioner being o port of banking company Habib Bank Limited is liable to pay sales tax" and that "banking companies would be liable to pay sales tax on rendering these ten services", which includes the service of safe deposit locker and safe vault respectively under tariff subheading 9813.49(X and 9813.4910. The learned counsel has successfully dispelled the assumption that the appellant is a banking company, but as stored above this fact in itself would not exclude the liability of the appellant to pay sales tax". Therefore in view of the above position of law and facts. I with utmost respect disagree with the findings of the Honorable Chairman / Member Judicial recorded at paras 14 and 15 wherein the order for taxing the modaraba company was set aside. I accordingly hold that the services of a modaraba company are in their nature 'Management services including Funds and Assets management services' and the appellant is liable to pay the tax on the remuneration received. 79. In view of the foregoing discussion, I do not find any reason to interfere with the Order-in- Appeal. 26. The appeal has no merits and accordingly dismissed. (RAZIA SULTANA TAHER) MEMBER TECHNICAL Karachi Oared : 11.01.2016 Copies supplied to:. 1. The Appellant through authorized Representative. 2. The Assistant Commissioner (Unit- I), SRB, Karachi. Copy for information to :- 3) The Commissioner (Appeals). SRB, Karachi. 4) The Deputy Commissioner (Legal), SRB, Karachi. 5) Office copy 6) Guard file. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem