EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark MAN MOHAN SINGH vs ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX Civil Miscellaneous Writ Petition No, Nil of 1993 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: MAN MOHAN SINGH Respondant: ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX Result: Order accordingly Judgment Date: 1993-03-24 Court: Allahabad High Court Judges: Om Prakash A. N. Gupta Citations Advocates Statutes 1994 P T D 615 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT ' Notices under section 148 have been issued against the petitioner. Thereafter, the petitioner made an application dated December 23, 1991 (Annexure "7" to the writ petition), stating that the return filed under section 139 be treated to have been filed pursuant to notices issued under section 148. It is urged by counsel for the petitioner that, after the aforesaid application has been made, the petitioner has become entitled to get a copy of the reasons, in view of the decision in the case of K.M. Bansal (deceased) v. CIT (1992) 195 ITR 247 (All.) in which this Court has taken the view that, when a return was filed pursuant to a notice issued under section 148 by the petitioners, then the Assessing Officer shall communicate the reasons recorded by ,him under section 148 to the assessee, subject, of course, to the necessity of protecting his source/informant, if he thinks such protection is necessary in any given case. ' Following the said decision, we dispose of the writ petition finally with the observation that, if the petitioner has already made an application for obtaining a copy of the reasons recorded by the assessing authority to proceed under section 148 of the Income Tax Act, 1961, then the assessing authority shall communicate the reasons recorded by him under section 148 to the petitioner within one week from the date a certified copy of this order is produced before him by the petitioner alongwith a copy of the application said to have been made in this behalf to the respondent, subject, of course, to the necessity of protecting his source/informant, if he thinks that protection is necessary in this case and when the reasons are communicated by the assessing authority, the petitioner may file reply before him within one week from the date of communication of the reasons. Till then, the proceedings pursuant to the impugned notices, dated November 19, 1991 (Annexure "6" to the petition), relating to the assessment years 1988-89 and 1989-90, will not be completed ' A copy of this order may be given within 24 hours on payment. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Allahabad High Court Judge(s): Om Prakash, A. N. Gupta Title: MAN MOHAN SINGH vs ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX Case No.: Civil Miscellaneous Writ Petition No, Nil of 1993 Date of Judgment: 1993-03-24 Reported As: 1994 P T D 615 Result: Order accordingly Judgment JUDGMENT ' Notices under section 148 have been issued against the petitioner. Thereafter, the petitioner made an application dated December 23, 1991 (Annexure "7" to the writ petition), stating that the return filed under section 139 be treated to have been filed pursuant to notices issued under section 148. It is urged by counsel for the petitioner that, after the aforesaid application has been made, the petitioner has become entitled to get a copy of the reasons, in view of the decision in the case of K.M. Bansal (deceased) v. CIT (1992) 195 ITR 247 (All.) in which this Court has taken the view that, when a return was filed pursuant to a notice issued under section 148 by the petitioners, then the Assessing Officer shall communicate the reasons recorded by ,him under section 148 to the assessee, subject, of course, to the necessity of protecting his source/informant, if he thinks such protection is necessary in any given case. ' Following the said decision, we dispose of the writ petition finally with the observation that, if the petitioner has already made an application for obtaining a copy of the reasons recorded by the assessing authority to proceed under section 148 of the Income Tax Act, 1961, then the assessing authority shall communicate the reasons recorded by him under section 148 to the petitioner within one week from the date a certified copy of this order is produced before him by the petitioner alongwith a copy of the application said to have been made in this behalf to the respondent, subject, of course, to the necessity of protecting his source/informant, if he thinks that protection is necessary in this case and when the reasons are communicated by the assessing authority, the petitioner may file reply before him within one week from the date of communication of the reasons. Till then, the proceedings pursuant to the impugned notices, dated November 19, 1991 (Annexure "6" to the petition), relating to the assessment years 1988-89 and 1989-90, will not be completed ' A copy of this order may be given within 24 hours on payment. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem