EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark Members NAZAR HUSSAIN SHAH vs SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE, BAHAWALPUR ETC. Case No, 116/233 of 1978, Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 3 Appeallant: Members NAZAR HUSSAIN SHAH Respondant: SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE, BAHAWALPUR ETC. Result: Appeal accepted Judgment Date: 1979-09-18 Court: Azad Jammu and Kashmir Service Tribunal Judges: Muhammad Saleem Chaudhry Mazhar Muneer S. Hafeez-Ur-Rehman Citations Advocates Statutes 1980 P L C (C. S.) 486 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' M. SALEM CHAuDHRT (CHAIRMAN).-Nazar Hussain Shah, the appellant, was punished on 24th January, 1969 with for feiture of 12 years' approved service as Foot Constable by the S. P., Bahawalpur. On appeal against the order of the S. P., the D. 1.-G. Police Bahawalpur, enhanced the sentence to dismissal from service with effect from 25th April, 1969. Later, the appellant's appeal to the I.-G. Police was also turned down on 27th August, 1969. The charge was that the appellant along with three others of a Police guard on 3rd November, 1968 was found unlawfully absent from sentry duty at the Adam Waha Railway Bridge at 3-00 p. m. When Ghulam Hussain Butt, D. S. P., carried out a surprise check. ' We need not go into the merits of the case, because this tribunals has already given its judgment in the case of one Mohammad Siddique who sought to impugn the same order of the D. I.-G. Police, Bahawalpur, as the appellant is assailing in case No, 283/97 of 1974 (Muhmimad Siddique v. S. P., Bahawalpur etc.) Muhammad Siddique was one of the other three dismissed vide the impugned order along with the appellant. The tribunal had expressed the opinion in that case that the D. I.-G. Police was not within his competence to make the order of enhancement of sentence because the appellant having been recruited prior to 1958 was to be governed by Bahawalpur Police Rules which did not empower the D. I.-G. Police to enhance the punishment. ' We may add that there is a time gap of nearly three years between the instant case and above-cited judgment which was announced on 18th October, 1976. The appellant had gone into writ in the High Court where the petition was dismissed on 19th April, 1978 with the learned Judge observation that while approaching the Service Tribunal the appellant could rely on the provisions of section 14 of the Limitation Act or consider the advisability of relying upon the principle underlying that provision. On behalf of the appellant an application for condonation of delay has been made ott the basis of this observation of the High Court. We are convinced that the case was being pursued with due diligence in the High Court and that the appellant earns the benefit of section 14 of the Limitation Act. In view of the above, the appeal is accepted and the order of the D. I.-G. Police dated 25th April, 1969 being void is set aside. Similarly the order dated 27th August, 1969 passed by the I.O. Police being based upon a void order is also set aside. Resultantly the original order of a punishment will stand as the appellant has shown nothing to merit' Interference with the same. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Azad Jammu and Kashmir Service Tribunal Judge(s): Muhammad Saleem Chaudhry, Mazhar Muneer, S. Hafeez-Ur-Rehman Title: Members NAZAR HUSSAIN SHAH vs SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE, BAHAWALPUR ETC. Case No.: Case No, 116/233 of 1978, Date of Judgment: 1979-09-18 Reported As: 1980 P L C (C. S.) 486 Result: Appeal accepted Judgment ORDER ' M. SALEM CHAuDHRT (CHAIRMAN).-Nazar Hussain Shah, the appellant, was punished on 24th January, 1969 with for feiture of 12 years' approved service as Foot Constable by the S. P., Bahawalpur. On appeal against the order of the S. P., the D. 1.-G. Police Bahawalpur, enhanced the sentence to dismissal from service with effect from 25th April, 1969. Later, the appellant's appeal to the I.-G. Police was also turned down on 27th August, 1969. The charge was that the appellant along with three others of a Police guard on 3rd November, 1968 was found unlawfully absent from sentry duty at the Adam Waha Railway Bridge at 3-00 p. m. When Ghulam Hussain Butt, D. S. P., carried out a surprise check. ' We need not go into the merits of the case, because this tribunals has already given its judgment in the case of one Mohammad Siddique who sought to impugn the same order of the D. I.-G. Police, Bahawalpur, as the appellant is assailing in case No, 283/97 of 1974 (Muhmimad Siddique v. S. P., Bahawalpur etc.) Muhammad Siddique was one of the other three dismissed vide the impugned order along with the appellant. The tribunal had expressed the opinion in that case that the D. I.-G. Police was not within his competence to make the order of enhancement of sentence because the appellant having been recruited prior to 1958 was to be governed by Bahawalpur Police Rules which did not empower the D. I.-G. Police to enhance the punishment. ' We may add that there is a time gap of nearly three years between the instant case and above-cited judgment which was announced on 18th October, 1976. The appellant had gone into writ in the High Court where the petition was dismissed on 19th April, 1978 with the learned Judge observation that while approaching the Service Tribunal the appellant could rely on the provisions of section 14 of the Limitation Act or consider the advisability of relying upon the principle underlying that provision. On behalf of the appellant an application for condonation of delay has been made ott the basis of this observation of the High Court. We are convinced that the case was being pursued with due diligence in the High Court and that the appellant earns the benefit of section 14 of the Limitation Act. In view of the above, the appeal is accepted and the order of the D. I.-G. Police dated 25th April, 1969 being void is set aside. Similarly the order dated 27th August, 1969 passed by the I.O. Police being based upon a void order is also set aside. Resultantly the original order of a punishment will stand as the appellant has shown nothing to merit' Interference with the same. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem