EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark Messrs DUTY FREE SHOP LTD vs CENTRAL BOARD OF REVENUE and others Constitutional Petitions Nos.D-847, D-1865 and D-1930 of 1997C. P. No. 1865 of 1997C.Ps. Nos. 847 and 1930 of 1997C.F. No.847 of 1997 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 6 Coram 3 Appeallant: Messrs DUTY FREE SHOP LTD Respondant: CENTRAL BOARD OF REVENUE and others Result: Petition allowed Judgment Date: 1999-07-05 Court: Sindh High Court Judges: Wajihuddin Ahmed Raja Qureshi Ghous Muhammad Citations Advocates Statutes 2000 P T D 1167 Judgment JUDGMENT WAJIHUDDIN AHMED, J. ---They petitioner in all these Constitutional petitions are engaged in the business of running Duty Free Shops. All of them are holders of private warehouse licences. Their common grievance is that in deviation of the prevalent practice orders have lately been passed to collect withholding tax at the statutory rates of 5% from the petitioners under section 50(5) of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1979 They say that such has come about mutely upon a change of opinion and, at any rate, is not in conformity with clause (b) of section 50(5) of the Ordinance aforesaid of these petitioners Constitutional Petition No.D-847/1997 was admitted to regular hearing on 27-8-1997, whereas the. Remaining two were taken up after putting the parties on notice that the same can be heard, admitted and disposed of at the same time. Orders were reserved upon due hearing on 9-12-1997. There are two kinds of warehouses envisaged, respectively, by sections 12 and 13 of the Customs Act, 1969, viz., public warehouses established and run under official control and private warehouses, vesting in non-official or private hands. Admittedly each of the petitioners here holds a private warehouse licence. Under Customs General Order (CGO) No.3 of 1982, issued on 4-4-1982 (reported in PTCL 1983 SC 68), the PIA Duty Free Shops were enabled to facilitate returning Pakistanis to purchase permissible goods under the Baggage Rules as also to streamline the prevalent system of sales at the International Airport Terminals. The procedure this delineated apparently applies to all the three petitioners pert. In short, those similarly placed as the petitioners are permitted to import goods and store the same in private bonded warehouses licensed to each of them and such is visualized to be against in-bond bills of entry. Goods thus stored are issued against indents to the relevant sales cutlet under escort by a customs officer which being done such are entered in the relevant Sales Outlet Stock Register, the escorting officer counter-- signing the entry. More or less similar procedure is followed for airport outlets. In terms of section 97 of the Customs Act no warehqused goods may be taken out of any warehouse, except on clearance for home consumption or export or for removal to another warehouse or as otherwise provided in the Act. The value of and Wt rate of duty applicable to any imported goods cleared from a warehouse under section 104 of the Act would be the value and the rate of duty in force on the date on which the bill of entry for clearance of such goods is presented under the said section. This is postulated by section 30 of the Act. It, therefore, follows in the instant cases that till such time as the goods remain warehoused or are exported while warehoused or are removed to another warehouse no customs duty is payable oh the same. This arises because the goods so warehoused are not technically imported into Pakistan. In point would be Canada Sugar Company v. The Queen (1898) AC 735, where it was observed that goods are imported into Canada "when the goods are landed and delivered to the importer or to his order---or when they are taken away out of warehouse if, instead of being delivered, they have been placed in bond". Letter, dated 29-7-1992 from the Central Board of Revenue at page 159 of Petition No.D-847 of 1997 refers indeed through a letter of even date (page 27-CP No. 1865 of 1997) issued by the Central Board of Revenue to the Collectors of Customs (Preventive) (Appraisement), Karachi such Collectors of Customs were advised "to issue the licences and allow the clearance of all goods/fixtures imported for the Duty Free Shops without duties, taxes, import levies and warehousing fee/charge". A copy of such letter was forwarded to Aar Rianta International, the petitioner in Constitutional Petition No.D-1865 of 1997, it has not been disputed before us that the other petitioners also enjoy similar facilities. It is noteworthy that through the former letter, .Dated 29-7-1992 from the Central Board of Revenue to Messrs Aar Rianta International, it was observed, "---------the provisions of withholding under section 50(5) will obviously not apply as is the existing practice in case of goods placed in the bond. Income-taxes will, however, be payable on the income/profits earned during the year". It is a deviation from this practice, apparently, applicable to the other petitioners as well, which has given rise to petitions in hand. Mr. S. Tariq A.I, the learned Standing Counsel for the Federal Government of Pakistan, on his part, has pointed out that copies of the first mentioned such letter were not forwarded by the author thereof, namely, the Second Secretary in the Central Board of Revenue to the other relevant departments. He has, however, neither disputed the authenticity of the said letter nor the alleged practice behind which the petitioners seek shelter. The petitioner's learned counsel, as regards the continuation and protection of such practice have relied upon Nazeer Ahmed v. Pakistan CE&LC PLD 1988 SC 370 , Asian Food Industries Ltd. v. Pakistan 1985 SCMR 1753 and Eduljee Dinshaw Ltd. v. Income Tax Officer 1990 PTD 155 , the rule spelt out in these precedents is well-settled and is shored up by manifest equities. Such is that where a particular executive construction has held the field for a considerable period of time many rights are thrown up in the process based upon continued, reliance thereupon. Departure from such a construction cannot be casually allowed because, in the process, vested rights may come to be disturbed or destroyed. Mere executive change of opinion in the context, therefore is not easily to be upheld. Indeed an element of estoppels appears to `be invokable in such situations. Even so, a manifestly wrong construction not merely placed upon rules or instructions but upon the statutory law itself cannot also be easily brooked. Having said as much and irrespective of the above practice, about which one is not wholly convinced, these petitions can be disposed of upon quite another plane; that is, upon the correct construction of section 50(5) of the Income Tax Ordinance. The relevant provision is reproduced hereunder: (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force--- (a) the Collector of Customs shall, in the case of every importer of goods, collect advance tax computed, on the basis of the value of such goods as increased by the customs duty and sales tax, if any, levied thereupon, at the rates specified in the First Schedule, and credit for the tax so collected in any financial year shall, subject to the provisions of section 53, be given in computing the tax payable by such importer for the assessment year commencing on the first day of only next following the said financial year, or in the case of an assessee to whom section 72 or section 81 applies, the assessment year, in which the said data, as referred to therein, falls, whichever is the later; (b) the tax under clause (a) shall be collected in the same manner and at the same time as the customs duty, as if such goods (even though exempt from such duty) were liable to such duty, and all the provisions of the Customs Act, 1969 (IV of 1969) shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly." It has been contended before us that the word "levied" in clause (a) of subsection (5) has been substituted for the word "leviable" the substitution having been brought about by the Finance Act, 1995. Upon this premise and even generally it is argued that because the goods imported for the purpose of the free duty three establishments are never technically imported, the cut off point of time for the levy of the customs duty never materializes and that being so no occasion whatever arises for the realization of the withholding tax under section 50(5) of the Income Tax Ordinance. The argument of Mr. Mansoor Ahmed Khan. I fully subscribed. In the first place, the word "levied" which has been substituted for the word "leviable" in clause (a) of section 50(5) of the Ordinance involves a completed act as against an act which may still be in contemplation. It envisages a situation where actual and effective levy is of significance rather than a mere possibility thereof, distinguished by Mr. Jawaid Farooqui as actual liability and mere taxability. Withholding-- tax in this background cannot be worked out unless the customs duty and sales tax are determined, even if exempted. Looked at in such a scenario the liability for recovery of withholding tax moves so much further away. This is augmented by the fact that the actual collection of withholding tax in terms of clause (b) of section 50(5) has to be made "in the same manner and at the same time as the customs duty", exemption or no exemption being immaterial and, the crucial elements being the, "manner" and the "time" in or at which the Customs duty is notionally to be collected. Such "manner" and. Such "time" never technically imported or the time to collect customs duty never arrives, such time for effecting collection or realization of withholding tax under section 50(5) would also to the same extent stand removed in the time scale. In this view of the matter, the petitioner cannot be subjected to recovery of withholding tax in contemplation of the said provision, namely, section-50(5) of the Income Tax Ordinance. Orders to such effect issued by the respondents are to that extent invalid and are declared to be so. While I would allow these petitions in the foregoing terms, it remains to be said that such collections of withholding tax as have already been made would remain subject to appropriation or deduction of normal income tax under the applicable rules from the petitioners even through no further recoveries or realisations of withholding tax may be mad- from them. The grant not to carry any costs. RAJA QURESHI, J.- --I have had the advantage of reading the erudite judgment of my Lord the Chief Justice, and with my profoundest respect for my Lord the Chief Justice, I am unable to persuade myself to subscribe to the said judgment. Hence following are my reasons for my disagreement to the proposed judgment. The petitioners in all the Constitutional petitions hereinabove are engaged in the business of running Duty Free Shops. Their common grievance is that in deviation of the respondents to collect withholding tax at the statutory rate of 5% from the petitioners under section 50(5) of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1979, the primary contention raised before us is that adopting a mode in procedure which is not in conformity with clause (b) of section 50(5) of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1979. It is not disputed before us that petitioners hold a private warehouse licence and such Duty Free Shops have been established in Pakistan to facilitate returning Pakistanis to purchase permissible goods under the baggage rules and also to streamline the prevalent system of sales at the International Airport Terminals. In sum and substance the petitioners are permitted to import goods and store the same in private bonded warehouses to which duly licensed procedure is adopted for storing and removing such imported goods from the bonded warehouse in conformity with the provisions of the Customs Act 1969, whereby no goods are taken out of any warehouse except on clearance for home consumption or for removing to another warehouse or as otherwise provided in the Customs Act, 1969. The value and the rate of duty applicable to any imported goods cleared from a warehouse under section 104 of the Act is the value and rate of duty enforced on the data on which the bill of entry for clearance of such goods is presented under the provisions of the Customs Act. As such the contention of the petitioners before us is that till such time as the goods remain warehoused or are exported while warehoused or are removed to another warehouse no customs duty is payable on the same. The contention of the petitioners is that because the goods so warehoused are not technically imported into Pakistan there--fore, the goods of the petitioner cannot be subjected to the payment of Customs duties and consequently to the withholding tax under section 50(5) of the Income Tax Ordinance. They place their reliance on a letter (page 159 of the Petition No.847) issued by the Central Board of Revenue which for the purposes of ready reference is reproduced herein-under:--- "Government of Pakistan Central Board of Revenue (Revenue Division). C.N. ITJ-1-(8)/98 Islamabad 29th July, 1992. From. Mr. Muhammad Majid Qureshi. Second Secretary (Withholding Tax). To, Messrs AIR Rianta International Pakistan (Pvt.) Limited. Sub:Exemption of ADD Import Level for duty free shops at Jinnah Terminal Complex, Quaid-e-Azam International Airport, Karachi. I am directed to refer to your letter, dated 26th July, 1992 on the above subject and to say that since steadily the goods are not being technically imported into Pakistan and are being placed only in the bonded area the provisions of withholding under section 50(5) will obviously not apply as is the existing practice in case of goods placed in the bonds. Income Tax will, however, be payable on income profits earned during the year. (Sd.) For (Muhammad Majid Qureshi) IInd Secretary". As such, based on the aforementioned letter, the contention made by the petitioners before us is that the provisions of withholding tax under section 50(5) will not apply as is the existing practice in case of goods placed in the bonds. The aforementioned is the executive interpretation which, according to the petitioners had held the field for a considerable period of time whereby rights of the petitioners have bean created. Any departure from such practice and "executive opinion cannot be allowed because the vested rights which may have been accrued are likely to be disturbed and destroyed---. (1) What is import? (2) Whether letters of the Central Board (3) Whether "same time and in the same manner" would as per judicial interpretation fall in line in conformity with issued by the Central Board of Revenue? (4) Whether liability as fixed under section 50(5) of Income Tax Ordinance, 1979 to pay withholding tax on the goods having been imported could be deferred for collection or. Not? (5) Whether collection of a tax is only an incident of administration? The word "import' under the provisions of the Customs Act 1969 has been interpreted by the Supreme Court of Pakistan elaborately in East West Steamship Company v. Collector of Customs PLD 1976 SC 618 . Their Lordships have interpreted the word "import" as follows:-- "The word `import' carries the natural meaning of `bringing in' and has no technical meaning. Mr. A.K. Brohi construed the word `import' as entailing the entire process of filing Bill of Entry, discharging from the vessel at a Wharf, assessment of value of the goods and duty payable on them. We, however, see no warrant for placing this artificial meaning on the word `import'. In Black's Law Dictionary, `importation' is defined as `the act of bringing goods and merchandise into a country from a foreign country' and imported in general, has the same meaning in the Tariff laws that its etymology shows, in Porto, to carry in, to import is to bear or carry into. An imported article is one brought or carried into a country from abroad. In Wharton's Law Lexicon `import' is given the meaning goods or produce brought into a country from abroad. In order to explain Entry No 80.01 of the Tariff Act under which duty of 15% is levied on vessels exceeding 250% tons gross weight, the appellants conceded that ships brought from foreign countries for inland use were imported within the Sea Customs Act. It followed that machinery sections of the Sea Customs Act applied to their importation though they were not imported or home consumption, nor unloaded and wharfed etc." The above interpretation is in relation to section 20 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 which is corresponding to section 18 of the Customs Act, 1969. The above interpretation lays down the rule that as soon as "goods" land at Karachi Port, they become dutiable. Hence the, procedure in section in relation to bill of entry, home consumption, in bonding and rate of duty etc. Are irrelevant. The above principle will apply only when goods are exempt from duty because as held by the Supreme Court in Alsamrez's case 1986 SCMR 1917 and at page 1923 the reproduction with the following passage would be profitable:--- "From the above it would be seen that the concept of exemption presupposes a liability and is a grant or immunity from the payment of duty which would otherwise be attracted in respect of the goods. It has accordingly been held that `non-liability' and `exemption' are different concepts, the first connotes that the subject was never in the tax not, while the latter connotes that it was, but has been permitted to escape. Re: Sharpe Queen's Land Trustees Ltd. v. Commissioner of Stamp Duties 1944 St. R. Od.26 at page 33. Accordingly it would appear that mere grant of exemption under section 19 does not have the effect to modifying or altering the levy of duty under section 18 which continues to be in force. But the only legal duty that accrues under section 18 on the importation of dutiable goods is wiped off to the extent of exemption. The two sections, therefore clearly operate independently and the exercise of power under section 19, is distinct from the statutory provision contained in section 18 whereby the charge is created by Statute itself. In this context, it is not difficult to understand that section 30 has n material bearing on the controversy before us and its provision would not be violated either way on the determination of question whether exemption from payment of duty earlier granted was applicable to the case of the appellants or not." Upon examining section 50(5), the following words have beer employed in the Statute from which the intention of Legislature could be gathered:--- "The tax under clause (b) shall be collected in the same manner and at the same time as the customs duty, as if such goods (even though exempt from such duty) were liable to such duty and all the provisions of the Customs Act, 1969 (Act IV of 1969) shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly. " Indeed, same words were used and employed in proviso to section 3(4) of the Sales Tax Act, 1951, which again for the purposes or ready reference are reproduced herein under:--- "Provided that, in case of goods mentioned in clause (a) of subsection (1), the tax shall, where the board so directs, be payable at the same time and in the same manner as the duty of Excise under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (I of 1944) and the provisions of the said Act and the rules made thereunder shall, so far as may be, with necessary modifications apply for the purposes of this Act as they apply for the purposes of the said Act. " The aforementioned proviso came to be interpreted and scrutinized by a Division Bench of our Court in Messrs English Biscuit Manufacturers Limited v. The Assistant Collector 1991 PTD 478 and it was held that "collection" or "recovery" and "assessability" of sales tax are two different concepts. Since in this case, the Central Excise Authorities could only collect sales tax, they could not make any `assessment' for tax. It is therefore, in this perspective that under section 50(5) of the Income Tax Ordinance also, the Customs Authorities can only `collect' the income-tax through relevant provisions of Customs Act, 1969. They are not concerned with the `assessment' or `levy' of income-tax which is the function of the Income Tax Authorities, such cannot therefore, the dependent upon the procedural sections of the Customs Act, 1969. It may " be pertinent to state that the tax deducted under section 50(5) becomes a final liability of income-tax under subsection (4) of section 80-C of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1979. Once it is the final income-tax liability, it would be profitable to state that the petitioners I have themselves considered their goods as imports and deductions under section 50(5) by the Customs Authorities comes to operate as the final income-tax liability and cannot be assessed any further under section 80-C(5). Having dilated upon as to what is an import and what is the interpretation of the words "at the same time and in the same manner" and as to what is `collected' and `levy' I would not like to embark upon as to the legal, value of the letter of the C.B.R. Or for that matter its circular whether such letter could impose or extinguish the levy fixed by the Statute. In order to ascertain this aspect I would rely on 1992 SCMR 1232 (Messrs Central Insurance Company and others v. The Central Board of Revenue, Islamabad). Upon examining the judgment I am of a firm view that the Central Board of Revenue does not figure in the hierarchy of judicial forum provided for under the Ordinance and therefore, the interpretation placed by it to the provisions of the Ordinance, at the most can be treated as an administrative interpretation and not a judicial decision to qualify for treatment meted out to the petitioners herein. It has been stated that the goods are not technically imported into Pakistan. It may, at best be an administrative opinion, liable to be varied/modified and, therefore, from its very nature, cannot be treated to be legal interpretation and in the event was to treat an administrative interpretation of a provision of law then surely it will lead to uncertainty and would cause dis-balance in the procedure. Reliance is placed on paras. 21, 22 and 23 of the above reported judgment (Central Insurance Company v. Central Board of Revenue). Consequently, the petitions fail and are hereby dismissed. HIGH COURT OF SINDH, KARACHI DR. GHOUS MUHAMMAD, J. ---These matters have been placed before me as a referee Judge in view of conflicting opinions authored by Wajihuddin Ahmed, C.J., as he then was, and Raja Qureshi, J., as he then was. The precise controversy is as to whether the goods which are sent to the bonds/warehouses or Duty Free Shops, after actual physical import, are to suffer income-tax under section 50(5) of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1979 (hereafter referred to as "the 1979 Ordinance") before the same are cleared for home consumption; or whether where clearance for home consumption would be irrelevant and the levy of such advance income-tax becomes payable even, at the time when the goods are sent to the bonds. Faced with such legal question, Wajihuddin Ahmed, C.J., as he then was, has opined that no advance income-tax under section 50(5) can be levied or deducted at the time when the goods are sent to the bonds and are not cleared for home consumption. On the other hand, Raja Qureshi, J, as he then was, in his dissenting judgment has come to conclusion that the advance income-tax under section 50(5) becomes payable even at the time the goods are sent to bond and are actually cleared for home consumption. 2. In order to resolve such conflict and appreciate the controversy it would be first pertinent to briefly lay down the procedure of imports as envisaged in the Customs Act, 1969 (hereafter referred to as "the 1969 Act") and the relevant notifications/orders pertaining to the Duty Free Shops. 3. Once the goods are imported from abroad into the country the following possibilities ensue:--- (a) The goods are immediately cleared for home consumption i.e. For use in the country; or (b) the goods are re-exported after the import; (c) the goods are sent to a warehouse/bond and any clearance for home consumption or re-export is deferred. 4. In the present matters it is the third scenario No. (c) which require further focus and elucidation. 5. Once the goods are imported the bill of entry is presented under section 79 of the 1969 Act for the home consumption or warehousing, as the case may be. Once this bill of entry is presented the assessment of duty takes place on such bill of entry whether for home consumption or warehousing, under section 80 of the 1969 Act. Though the assessment takes place at the time of presentation of such bill of entry under section 80, the actual payment of the customs duty in the case of the goods meant for home consumption, which is clearly borne out from the provisions of section 30(a) provides that the value of the goods and the rate of duty- applicable thereto, in case of goods cleared for home consumption under section 79, shall be the one prevailing on the date on which the bill of entry is presented. Once the duties as assessed under section 80 read with section 30 are paid in relation to goods for home consumption under section 79, such goods are cleared for home consumption under section 83. In striking contrast, where the goods are meant for warehousing, through the assessment would take place under section 80, the payability of the customs duty is 'deferred. In this context an application to warehouse the goods is moved under section 84 and thereafter the payment of the duty, surcharges and other charges occasion when such goods are cleared from the bond for home consumption. This is clearly provided for in section 104 read with section 30(b). 6. From the above analysis of the provisions of 1969 Act it is abundantly clear that in case of home consumption the customs duties and other charges allied thereto are to be paid at the time when the goods are cleared for home consumption. In other words, if goods are imported and immediately cleared for home consumption, the duties are to be paid immediately at the time of clearance; whereas if the goods are imported and their clearance deferred by sending them to bond/warehouse, the payment of the customs duty and other allied charges are deferred till such time such goods are cleared for home consumption from the bond. 7. This brings us to the arrangement of the Duty Free Shops i.e. Petitioners. Admittedly, under Customs General Order (CGO) No.3 of 1982, dated 4-4-1982 (see PTCL 1983 Statutes 68), the Duty Free Shops were brought about to facilitate returning Pakistanis from abroad to acquire goods under the Baggage Rules. The petitioners are holders of private warehouse licences and all their shops and godowns has been designated as private warehouse. The entry of the goods into these bonded warehouses as also their clearance therefrom are regulated by CGO No. 3 of 1982 as also the provisions of the 1969 Act. In this respect and for the purpose of these warehouses of the petitioners, the provisions of the 1969 Act is squarely applicable and there appears to be no dispute in this regard. It is not the case of respondents that customs duties in case of the warehouses of the petitioners are payable at the time of entry of the goods into such warehouses/bonds. On the contrary, it is an admitted position that no customs duty is payable at the time when goods enter into such bonds, while the said duties are only payable and actually paid when the goods are actually cleared for home consumption from these bonds of the petitioner. 8. This being the factual position the real issue is with regard to the applicability of, section 50(5) of the 1979 Ordinance to the goods which enter the bonds but are not cleared. A bare reading of section 50(5)(b) would confirm that the advance income-tax under section 50(5) i.e. Deduction at import stage, is only to be collected "in the same manner and at the same time as the customs duty, as if such goods (even though exempt from such duty) were liable to such duty, and all the provisions of the Customs Act, 1969 (VI of 1969) shall, as far as may be, apply accordingly". The inescapable conclusion is that the advance income-tax under section 50(5) is only to be levied, paid or collected, at the time when the customs duty is paid and not before. This being so, it is quite clear that since no customs duty is paid at the time, the goods enter the bond, no advance income-tax under section 50(5) would be payable. 9. In coming to the above conclusion it is needless to mention that since the provisions of law are so clear it is not necessary to go into the argument touching upon the aspect concerning the creation of vested rights through departmental circulars/orders or the settled past practice. 10. Raja Qureshi, J., as he then was, in arriving at his dissenting conclusion has placed reliance upon certain pronouncements of our superior Courts, which are East West Steam Shipping Co. v Collector of Customs PLD 1976 SC 618 , Al-Samrez 1986 SCMR 1917 , English Biscuit Manufacturers, Ltd. v. Assistant Collector 1991 PTD 478 and Central Insurance v. C.B.R. 1992 SCMR 1232. With utmost respect, these judgments have no bearing on the case and such decisions do not in any manner alter the payability/collection of any advance income-tax as explained hereinabove. In East West Steam Shipping Co. The Hon'ble Supreme Court dilated upon on the term '"import". In such decision it was observed that "import" carried its natural meaning of "bringing in" and had no technical meaning. While it is correct that the moment goods are imported or brought into the country, they become subject to the. 1969, Act. But this does not in any manner mean that the customs duty becomes payable immediately upon such import. The customs duty would only be payable immediately upon such import. The customs duty would only be payable according to the provisions of the 1969 Act. Section 18 of the 1969 Act is the charging section which though creates the charges at the time of "import" or "export", as the case may be, however, the payability is regulated by other provisions and in the case of goods entered into bond the same is deferred and then paid in terms of sections 104 and 30(b) of the 1969 Act is already explained above. Accordingly, the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in East West Steam Shipping Co. Hardly advances the case of the respondents. Likewise the landmark judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Al-, is totally irrelevant to .The present. Controversy, as such judgment looks into the question of vested rights and promissory estoppel with regard to exemptions and immunities from customs duty. More pertinently; the judgment of English Biscuit Manufacturers hardly supports the case of the respondents. On the contrary, the same advances case of the petitioners. In English Biscuit Manufacturers, the proviso to section 3(4) of the then Sales Tax Act, 1951 provided that sales tax shall be payable on a certain category of goods in the same manner as excise duty is paid under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. The Court distinguished the concepts of "assessability" and "recovery" and held that in the assessment was to take place in terms of the provisions of the Sales Tax Act, however, the payability, recovery or collection was to be governed by the Central Excises Act. In the present case, both imposition and/or payability of advance income-tax are governed by section 50(5)(b) of the 1979 Ordinance, clearly stipulates that payability of the advance income-tax shall occasion at the time when customs duty under the 1969 Act becomes payable. The judgment of the Sindh High Court in English Biscuit Manufacturers, is an authority for the proposition that words in the parent taxing statute (i.e. Which creates the charge itself) are to be construed as to appreciate and decipher the incidence of the very charge/imposition on one hand and the methodology of its collection, recovery or payability on the other. In the present statute i.e. The 1979 Ordinance, creates the charge and correspondingly imports the machinery of the 1969 Act as regards collection of the advance tax. In this manner English Biscuit Manufacturers is of no help to respondents. Lastly, the judgment of the Supreme Court in Central Insurance is also completely irrelevant. The said judgment, inter alia, holds that the Central Board of Revenue does not figure in the hierarchy of judicial forums envisaged in the taxing statute and as such the same cannot offer any interpretation to the provisions thereof. I have already made it clear that since the words of statute are so clear no heed is paid to the departmental circulars/letters. 11. In this manner; I feel that the opinion of Wajihuddin Ahmed, C.J., as he then was, is an expression of the correct statement of law and I accordingly agree with him and allow these petitions by declaring all notices, demands, recoveries and collections pertaining to advance income-tax from the petitioner on goods which are not cleared for home consumption but which -only find way into bonds/warehouses, to be without jurisdiction, unconstitutional, void ab initio and of no legal effect. This would also be the order of the Court by majority of two against two against one. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Sindh High Court Judge(s): Wajihuddin Ahmed, Raja Qureshi, Ghous Muhammad Title: Messrs DUTY FREE SHOP LTD vs CENTRAL BOARD OF REVENUE and others Case No.: Constitutional Petitions Nos.D-847, D-1865 and D-1930 of 1997C. P. No. 1865 of 1997C.Ps. Nos. 847 and 1930 of 1997C.F. No.847 of 1997 Date of Judgment: 1999-07-05 Reported As: 2000 P T D 1167 Result: Petition allowed Judgment JUDGMENT WAJIHUDDIN AHMED, J. ---They petitioner in all these Constitutional petitions are engaged in the business of running Duty Free Shops. All of them are holders of private warehouse licences. Their common grievance is that in deviation of the prevalent practice orders have lately been passed to collect withholding tax at the statutory rates of 5% from the petitioners under section 50(5) of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1979 They say that such has come about mutely upon a change of opinion and, at any rate, is not in conformity with clause (b) of section 50(5) of the Ordinance aforesaid of these petitioners Constitutional Petition No.D-847/1997 was admitted to regular hearing on 27-8-1997, whereas the. Remaining two were taken up after putting the parties on notice that the same can be heard, admitted and disposed of at the same time. Orders were reserved upon due hearing on 9-12-1997. There are two kinds of warehouses envisaged, respectively, by sections 12 and 13 of the Customs Act, 1969, viz., public warehouses established and run under official control and private warehouses, vesting in non-official or private hands. Admittedly each of the petitioners here holds a private warehouse licence. Under Customs General Order (CGO) No.3 of 1982, issued on 4-4-1982 (reported in PTCL 1983 SC 68), the PIA Duty Free Shops were enabled to facilitate returning Pakistanis to purchase permissible goods under the Baggage Rules as also to streamline the prevalent system of sales at the International Airport Terminals. The procedure this delineated apparently applies to all the three petitioners pert. In short, those similarly placed as the petitioners are permitted to import goods and store the same in private bonded warehouses licensed to each of them and such is visualized to be against in-bond bills of entry. Goods thus stored are issued against indents to the relevant sales cutlet under escort by a customs officer which being done such are entered in the relevant Sales Outlet Stock Register, the escorting officer counter-- signing the entry. More or less similar procedure is followed for airport outlets. In terms of section 97 of the Customs Act no warehqused goods may be taken out of any warehouse, except on clearance for home consumption or export or for removal to another warehouse or as otherwise provided in the Act. The value of and Wt rate of duty applicable to any imported goods cleared from a warehouse under section 104 of the Act would be the value and the rate of duty in force on the date on which the bill of entry for clearance of such goods is presented under the said section. This is postulated by section 30 of the Act. It, therefore, follows in the instant cases that till such time as the goods remain warehoused or are exported while warehoused or are removed to another warehouse no customs duty is payable oh the same. This arises because the goods so warehoused are not technically imported into Pakistan. In point would be Canada Sugar Company v. The Queen (1898) AC 735, where it was observed that goods are imported into Canada "when the goods are landed and delivered to the importer or to his order---or when they are taken away out of warehouse if, instead of being delivered, they have been placed in bond". Letter, dated 29-7-1992 from the Central Board of Revenue at page 159 of Petition No.D-847 of 1997 refers indeed through a letter of even date (page 27-CP No. 1865 of 1997) issued by the Central Board of Revenue to the Collectors of Customs (Preventive) (Appraisement), Karachi such Collectors of Customs were advised "to issue the licences and allow the clearance of all goods/fixtures imported for the Duty Free Shops without duties, taxes, import levies and warehousing fee/charge". A copy of such letter was forwarded to Aar Rianta International, the petitioner in Constitutional Petition No.D-1865 of 1997, it has not been disputed before us that the other petitioners also enjoy similar facilities. It is noteworthy that through the former letter, .Dated 29-7-1992 from the Central Board of Revenue to Messrs Aar Rianta International, it was observed, "---------the provisions of withholding under section 50(5) will obviously not apply as is the existing practice in case of goods placed in the bond. Income-taxes will, however, be payable on the income/profits earned during the year". It is a deviation from this practice, apparently, applicable to the other petitioners as well, which has given rise to petitions in hand. Mr. S. Tariq A.I, the learned Standing Counsel for the Federal Government of Pakistan, on his part, has pointed out that copies of the first mentioned such letter were not forwarded by the author thereof, namely, the Second Secretary in the Central Board of Revenue to the other relevant departments. He has, however, neither disputed the authenticity of the said letter nor the alleged practice behind which the petitioners seek shelter. The petitioner's learned counsel, as regards the continuation and protection of such practice have relied upon Nazeer Ahmed v. Pakistan CE&LC PLD 1988 SC 370 , Asian Food Industries Ltd. v. Pakistan 1985 SCMR 1753 and Eduljee Dinshaw Ltd. v. Income Tax Officer 1990 PTD 155 , the rule spelt out in these precedents is well-settled and is shored up by manifest equities. Such is that where a particular executive construction has held the field for a considerable period of time many rights are thrown up in the process based upon continued, reliance thereupon. Departure from such a construction cannot be casually allowed because, in the process, vested rights may come to be disturbed or destroyed. Mere executive change of opinion in the context, therefore is not easily to be upheld. Indeed an element of estoppels appears to `be invokable in such situations. Even so, a manifestly wrong construction not merely placed upon rules or instructions but upon the statutory law itself cannot also be easily brooked. Having said as much and irrespective of the above practice, about which one is not wholly convinced, these petitions can be disposed of upon quite another plane; that is, upon the correct construction of section 50(5) of the Income Tax Ordinance. The relevant provision is reproduced hereunder: (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force--- (a) the Collector of Customs shall, in the case of every importer of goods, collect advance tax computed, on the basis of the value of such goods as increased by the customs duty and sales tax, if any, levied thereupon, at the rates specified in the First Schedule, and credit for the tax so collected in any financial year shall, subject to the provisions of section 53, be given in computing the tax payable by such importer for the assessment year commencing on the first day of only next following the said financial year, or in the case of an assessee to whom section 72 or section 81 applies, the assessment year, in which the said data, as referred to therein, falls, whichever is the later; (b) the tax under clause (a) shall be collected in the same manner and at the same time as the customs duty, as if such goods (even though exempt from such duty) were liable to such duty, and all the provisions of the Customs Act, 1969 (IV of 1969) shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly." It has been contended before us that the word "levied" in clause (a) of subsection (5) has been substituted for the word "leviable" the substitution having been brought about by the Finance Act, 1995. Upon this premise and even generally it is argued that because the goods imported for the purpose of the free duty three establishments are never technically imported, the cut off point of time for the levy of the customs duty never materializes and that being so no occasion whatever arises for the realization of the withholding tax under section 50(5) of the Income Tax Ordinance. The argument of Mr. Mansoor Ahmed Khan. I fully subscribed. In the first place, the word "levied" which has been substituted for the word "leviable" in clause (a) of section 50(5) of the Ordinance involves a completed act as against an act which may still be in contemplation. It envisages a situation where actual and effective levy is of significance rather than a mere possibility thereof, distinguished by Mr. Jawaid Farooqui as actual liability and mere taxability. Withholding-- tax in this background cannot be worked out unless the customs duty and sales tax are determined, even if exempted. Looked at in such a scenario the liability for recovery of withholding tax moves so much further away. This is augmented by the fact that the actual collection of withholding tax in terms of clause (b) of section 50(5) has to be made "in the same manner and at the same time as the customs duty", exemption or no exemption being immaterial and, the crucial elements being the, "manner" and the "time" in or at which the Customs duty is notionally to be collected. Such "manner" and. Such "time" never technically imported or the time to collect customs duty never arrives, such time for effecting collection or realization of withholding tax under section 50(5) would also to the same extent stand removed in the time scale. In this view of the matter, the petitioner cannot be subjected to recovery of withholding tax in contemplation of the said provision, namely, section-50(5) of the Income Tax Ordinance. Orders to such effect issued by the respondents are to that extent invalid and are declared to be so. While I would allow these petitions in the foregoing terms, it remains to be said that such collections of withholding tax as have already been made would remain subject to appropriation or deduction of normal income tax under the applicable rules from the petitioners even through no further recoveries or realisations of withholding tax may be mad- from them. The grant not to carry any costs. RAJA QURESHI, J.- --I have had the advantage of reading the erudite judgment of my Lord the Chief Justice, and with my profoundest respect for my Lord the Chief Justice, I am unable to persuade myself to subscribe to the said judgment. Hence following are my reasons for my disagreement to the proposed judgment. The petitioners in all the Constitutional petitions hereinabove are engaged in the business of running Duty Free Shops. Their common grievance is that in deviation of the respondents to collect withholding tax at the statutory rate of 5% from the petitioners under section 50(5) of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1979, the primary contention raised before us is that adopting a mode in procedure which is not in conformity with clause (b) of section 50(5) of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1979. It is not disputed before us that petitioners hold a private warehouse licence and such Duty Free Shops have been established in Pakistan to facilitate returning Pakistanis to purchase permissible goods under the baggage rules and also to streamline the prevalent system of sales at the International Airport Terminals. In sum and substance the petitioners are permitted to import goods and store the same in private bonded warehouses to which duly licensed procedure is adopted for storing and removing such imported goods from the bonded warehouse in conformity with the provisions of the Customs Act 1969, whereby no goods are taken out of any warehouse except on clearance for home consumption or for removing to another warehouse or as otherwise provided in the Customs Act, 1969. The value and the rate of duty applicable to any imported goods cleared from a warehouse under section 104 of the Act is the value and rate of duty enforced on the data on which the bill of entry for clearance of such goods is presented under the provisions of the Customs Act. As such the contention of the petitioners before us is that till such time as the goods remain warehoused or are exported while warehoused or are removed to another warehouse no customs duty is payable on the same. The contention of the petitioners is that because the goods so warehoused are not technically imported into Pakistan there--fore, the goods of the petitioner cannot be subjected to the payment of Customs duties and consequently to the withholding tax under section 50(5) of the Income Tax Ordinance. They place their reliance on a letter (page 159 of the Petition No.847) issued by the Central Board of Revenue which for the purposes of ready reference is reproduced herein-under:--- "Government of Pakistan Central Board of Revenue (Revenue Division). C.N. ITJ-1-(8)/98 Islamabad 29th July, 1992. From. Mr. Muhammad Majid Qureshi. Second Secretary (Withholding Tax). To, Messrs AIR Rianta International Pakistan (Pvt.) Limited. Sub:Exemption of ADD Import Level for duty free shops at Jinnah Terminal Complex, Quaid-e-Azam International Airport, Karachi. I am directed to refer to your letter, dated 26th July, 1992 on the above subject and to say that since steadily the goods are not being technically imported into Pakistan and are being placed only in the bonded area the provisions of withholding under section 50(5) will obviously not apply as is the existing practice in case of goods placed in the bonds. Income Tax will, however, be payable on income profits earned during the year. (Sd.) For (Muhammad Majid Qureshi) IInd Secretary". As such, based on the aforementioned letter, the contention made by the petitioners before us is that the provisions of withholding tax under section 50(5) will not apply as is the existing practice in case of goods placed in the bonds. The aforementioned is the executive interpretation which, according to the petitioners had held the field for a considerable period of time whereby rights of the petitioners have bean created. Any departure from such practice and "executive opinion cannot be allowed because the vested rights which may have been accrued are likely to be disturbed and destroyed---. (1) What is import? (2) Whether letters of the Central Board (3) Whether "same time and in the same manner" would as per judicial interpretation fall in line in conformity with issued by the Central Board of Revenue? (4) Whether liability as fixed under section 50(5) of Income Tax Ordinance, 1979 to pay withholding tax on the goods having been imported could be deferred for collection or. Not? (5) Whether collection of a tax is only an incident of administration? The word "import' under the provisions of the Customs Act 1969 has been interpreted by the Supreme Court of Pakistan elaborately in East West Steamship Company v. Collector of Customs PLD 1976 SC 618 . Their Lordships have interpreted the word "import" as follows:-- "The word `import' carries the natural meaning of `bringing in' and has no technical meaning. Mr. A.K. Brohi construed the word `import' as entailing the entire process of filing Bill of Entry, discharging from the vessel at a Wharf, assessment of value of the goods and duty payable on them. We, however, see no warrant for placing this artificial meaning on the word `import'. In Black's Law Dictionary, `importation' is defined as `the act of bringing goods and merchandise into a country from a foreign country' and imported in general, has the same meaning in the Tariff laws that its etymology shows, in Porto, to carry in, to import is to bear or carry into. An imported article is one brought or carried into a country from abroad. In Wharton's Law Lexicon `import' is given the meaning goods or produce brought into a country from abroad. In order to explain Entry No 80.01 of the Tariff Act under which duty of 15% is levied on vessels exceeding 250% tons gross weight, the appellants conceded that ships brought from foreign countries for inland use were imported within the Sea Customs Act. It followed that machinery sections of the Sea Customs Act applied to their importation though they were not imported or home consumption, nor unloaded and wharfed etc." The above interpretation is in relation to section 20 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 which is corresponding to section 18 of the Customs Act, 1969. The above interpretation lays down the rule that as soon as "goods" land at Karachi Port, they become dutiable. Hence the, procedure in section in relation to bill of entry, home consumption, in bonding and rate of duty etc. Are irrelevant. The above principle will apply only when goods are exempt from duty because as held by the Supreme Court in Alsamrez's case 1986 SCMR 1917 and at page 1923 the reproduction with the following passage would be profitable:--- "From the above it would be seen that the concept of exemption presupposes a liability and is a grant or immunity from the payment of duty which would otherwise be attracted in respect of the goods. It has accordingly been held that `non-liability' and `exemption' are different concepts, the first connotes that the subject was never in the tax not, while the latter connotes that it was, but has been permitted to escape. Re: Sharpe Queen's Land Trustees Ltd. v. Commissioner of Stamp Duties 1944 St. R. Od.26 at page 33. Accordingly it would appear that mere grant of exemption under section 19 does not have the effect to modifying or altering the levy of duty under section 18 which continues to be in force. But the only legal duty that accrues under section 18 on the importation of dutiable goods is wiped off to the extent of exemption. The two sections, therefore clearly operate independently and the exercise of power under section 19, is distinct from the statutory provision contained in section 18 whereby the charge is created by Statute itself. In this context, it is not difficult to understand that section 30 has n material bearing on the controversy before us and its provision would not be violated either way on the determination of question whether exemption from payment of duty earlier granted was applicable to the case of the appellants or not." Upon examining section 50(5), the following words have beer employed in the Statute from which the intention of Legislature could be gathered:--- "The tax under clause (b) shall be collected in the same manner and at the same time as the customs duty, as if such goods (even though exempt from such duty) were liable to such duty and all the provisions of the Customs Act, 1969 (Act IV of 1969) shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly. " Indeed, same words were used and employed in proviso to section 3(4) of the Sales Tax Act, 1951, which again for the purposes or ready reference are reproduced herein under:--- "Provided that, in case of goods mentioned in clause (a) of subsection (1), the tax shall, where the board so directs, be payable at the same time and in the same manner as the duty of Excise under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (I of 1944) and the provisions of the said Act and the rules made thereunder shall, so far as may be, with necessary modifications apply for the purposes of this Act as they apply for the purposes of the said Act. " The aforementioned proviso came to be interpreted and scrutinized by a Division Bench of our Court in Messrs English Biscuit Manufacturers Limited v. The Assistant Collector 1991 PTD 478 and it was held that "collection" or "recovery" and "assessability" of sales tax are two different concepts. Since in this case, the Central Excise Authorities could only collect sales tax, they could not make any `assessment' for tax. It is therefore, in this perspective that under section 50(5) of the Income Tax Ordinance also, the Customs Authorities can only `collect' the income-tax through relevant provisions of Customs Act, 1969. They are not concerned with the `assessment' or `levy' of income-tax which is the function of the Income Tax Authorities, such cannot therefore, the dependent upon the procedural sections of the Customs Act, 1969. It may " be pertinent to state that the tax deducted under section 50(5) becomes a final liability of income-tax under subsection (4) of section 80-C of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1979. Once it is the final income-tax liability, it would be profitable to state that the petitioners I have themselves considered their goods as imports and deductions under section 50(5) by the Customs Authorities comes to operate as the final income-tax liability and cannot be assessed any further under section 80-C(5). Having dilated upon as to what is an import and what is the interpretation of the words "at the same time and in the same manner" and as to what is `collected' and `levy' I would not like to embark upon as to the legal, value of the letter of the C.B.R. Or for that matter its circular whether such letter could impose or extinguish the levy fixed by the Statute. In order to ascertain this aspect I would rely on 1992 SCMR 1232 (Messrs Central Insurance Company and others v. The Central Board of Revenue, Islamabad). Upon examining the judgment I am of a firm view that the Central Board of Revenue does not figure in the hierarchy of judicial forum provided for under the Ordinance and therefore, the interpretation placed by it to the provisions of the Ordinance, at the most can be treated as an administrative interpretation and not a judicial decision to qualify for treatment meted out to the petitioners herein. It has been stated that the goods are not technically imported into Pakistan. It may, at best be an administrative opinion, liable to be varied/modified and, therefore, from its very nature, cannot be treated to be legal interpretation and in the event was to treat an administrative interpretation of a provision of law then surely it will lead to uncertainty and would cause dis-balance in the procedure. Reliance is placed on paras. 21, 22 and 23 of the above reported judgment (Central Insurance Company v. Central Board of Revenue). Consequently, the petitions fail and are hereby dismissed. HIGH COURT OF SINDH, KARACHI DR. GHOUS MUHAMMAD, J. ---These matters have been placed before me as a referee Judge in view of conflicting opinions authored by Wajihuddin Ahmed, C.J., as he then was, and Raja Qureshi, J., as he then was. The precise controversy is as to whether the goods which are sent to the bonds/warehouses or Duty Free Shops, after actual physical import, are to suffer income-tax under section 50(5) of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1979 (hereafter referred to as "the 1979 Ordinance") before the same are cleared for home consumption; or whether where clearance for home consumption would be irrelevant and the levy of such advance income-tax becomes payable even, at the time when the goods are sent to the bonds. Faced with such legal question, Wajihuddin Ahmed, C.J., as he then was, has opined that no advance income-tax under section 50(5) can be levied or deducted at the time when the goods are sent to the bonds and are not cleared for home consumption. On the other hand, Raja Qureshi, J, as he then was, in his dissenting judgment has come to conclusion that the advance income-tax under section 50(5) becomes payable even at the time the goods are sent to bond and are actually cleared for home consumption. 2. In order to resolve such conflict and appreciate the controversy it would be first pertinent to briefly lay down the procedure of imports as envisaged in the Customs Act, 1969 (hereafter referred to as "the 1969 Act") and the relevant notifications/orders pertaining to the Duty Free Shops. 3. Once the goods are imported from abroad into the country the following possibilities ensue:--- (a) The goods are immediately cleared for home consumption i.e. For use in the country; or (b) the goods are re-exported after the import; (c) the goods are sent to a warehouse/bond and any clearance for home consumption or re-export is deferred. 4. In the present matters it is the third scenario No. (c) which require further focus and elucidation. 5. Once the goods are imported the bill of entry is presented under section 79 of the 1969 Act for the home consumption or warehousing, as the case may be. Once this bill of entry is presented the assessment of duty takes place on such bill of entry whether for home consumption or warehousing, under section 80 of the 1969 Act. Though the assessment takes place at the time of presentation of such bill of entry under section 80, the actual payment of the customs duty in the case of the goods meant for home consumption, which is clearly borne out from the provisions of section 30(a) provides that the value of the goods and the rate of duty- applicable thereto, in case of goods cleared for home consumption under section 79, shall be the one prevailing on the date on which the bill of entry is presented. Once the duties as assessed under section 80 read with section 30 are paid in relation to goods for home consumption under section 79, such goods are cleared for home consumption under section 83. In striking contrast, where the goods are meant for warehousing, through the assessment would take place under section 80, the payability of the customs duty is 'deferred. In this context an application to warehouse the goods is moved under section 84 and thereafter the payment of the duty, surcharges and other charges occasion when such goods are cleared from the bond for home consumption. This is clearly provided for in section 104 read with section 30(b). 6. From the above analysis of the provisions of 1969 Act it is abundantly clear that in case of home consumption the customs duties and other charges allied thereto are to be paid at the time when the goods are cleared for home consumption. In other words, if goods are imported and immediately cleared for home consumption, the duties are to be paid immediately at the time of clearance; whereas if the goods are imported and their clearance deferred by sending them to bond/warehouse, the payment of the customs duty and other allied charges are deferred till such time such goods are cleared for home consumption from the bond. 7. This brings us to the arrangement of the Duty Free Shops i.e. Petitioners. Admittedly, under Customs General Order (CGO) No.3 of 1982, dated 4-4-1982 (see PTCL 1983 Statutes 68), the Duty Free Shops were brought about to facilitate returning Pakistanis from abroad to acquire goods under the Baggage Rules. The petitioners are holders of private warehouse licences and all their shops and godowns has been designated as private warehouse. The entry of the goods into these bonded warehouses as also their clearance therefrom are regulated by CGO No. 3 of 1982 as also the provisions of the 1969 Act. In this respect and for the purpose of these warehouses of the petitioners, the provisions of the 1969 Act is squarely applicable and there appears to be no dispute in this regard. It is not the case of respondents that customs duties in case of the warehouses of the petitioners are payable at the time of entry of the goods into such warehouses/bonds. On the contrary, it is an admitted position that no customs duty is payable at the time when goods enter into such bonds, while the said duties are only payable and actually paid when the goods are actually cleared for home consumption from these bonds of the petitioner. 8. This being the factual position the real issue is with regard to the applicability of, section 50(5) of the 1979 Ordinance to the goods which enter the bonds but are not cleared. A bare reading of section 50(5)(b) would confirm that the advance income-tax under section 50(5) i.e. Deduction at import stage, is only to be collected "in the same manner and at the same time as the customs duty, as if such goods (even though exempt from such duty) were liable to such duty, and all the provisions of the Customs Act, 1969 (VI of 1969) shall, as far as may be, apply accordingly". The inescapable conclusion is that the advance income-tax under section 50(5) is only to be levied, paid or collected, at the time when the customs duty is paid and not before. This being so, it is quite clear that since no customs duty is paid at the time, the goods enter the bond, no advance income-tax under section 50(5) would be payable. 9. In coming to the above conclusion it is needless to mention that since the provisions of law are so clear it is not necessary to go into the argument touching upon the aspect concerning the creation of vested rights through departmental circulars/orders or the settled past practice. 10. Raja Qureshi, J., as he then was, in arriving at his dissenting conclusion has placed reliance upon certain pronouncements of our superior Courts, which are East West Steam Shipping Co. v Collector of Customs PLD 1976 SC 618 , Al-Samrez 1986 SCMR 1917 , English Biscuit Manufacturers, Ltd. v. Assistant Collector 1991 PTD 478 and Central Insurance v. C.B.R. 1992 SCMR 1232. With utmost respect, these judgments have no bearing on the case and such decisions do not in any manner alter the payability/collection of any advance income-tax as explained hereinabove. In East West Steam Shipping Co. The Hon'ble Supreme Court dilated upon on the term '"import". In such decision it was observed that "import" carried its natural meaning of "bringing in" and had no technical meaning. While it is correct that the moment goods are imported or brought into the country, they become subject to the. 1969, Act. But this does not in any manner mean that the customs duty becomes payable immediately upon such import. The customs duty would only be payable immediately upon such import. The customs duty would only be payable according to the provisions of the 1969 Act. Section 18 of the 1969 Act is the charging section which though creates the charges at the time of "import" or "export", as the case may be, however, the payability is regulated by other provisions and in the case of goods entered into bond the same is deferred and then paid in terms of sections 104 and 30(b) of the 1969 Act is already explained above. Accordingly, the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in East West Steam Shipping Co. Hardly advances the case of the respondents. Likewise the landmark judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Al-, is totally irrelevant to .The present. Controversy, as such judgment looks into the question of vested rights and promissory estoppel with regard to exemptions and immunities from customs duty. More pertinently; the judgment of English Biscuit Manufacturers hardly supports the case of the respondents. On the contrary, the same advances case of the petitioners. In English Biscuit Manufacturers, the proviso to section 3(4) of the then Sales Tax Act, 1951 provided that sales tax shall be payable on a certain category of goods in the same manner as excise duty is paid under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. The Court distinguished the concepts of "assessability" and "recovery" and held that in the assessment was to take place in terms of the provisions of the Sales Tax Act, however, the payability, recovery or collection was to be governed by the Central Excises Act. In the present case, both imposition and/or payability of advance income-tax are governed by section 50(5)(b) of the 1979 Ordinance, clearly stipulates that payability of the advance income-tax shall occasion at the time when customs duty under the 1969 Act becomes payable. The judgment of the Sindh High Court in English Biscuit Manufacturers, is an authority for the proposition that words in the parent taxing statute (i.e. Which creates the charge itself) are to be construed as to appreciate and decipher the incidence of the very charge/imposition on one hand and the methodology of its collection, recovery or payability on the other. In the present statute i.e. The 1979 Ordinance, creates the charge and correspondingly imports the machinery of the 1969 Act as regards collection of the advance tax. In this manner English Biscuit Manufacturers is of no help to respondents. Lastly, the judgment of the Supreme Court in Central Insurance is also completely irrelevant. The said judgment, inter alia, holds that the Central Board of Revenue does not figure in the hierarchy of judicial forums envisaged in the taxing statute and as such the same cannot offer any interpretation to the provisions thereof. I have already made it clear that since the words of statute are so clear no heed is paid to the departmental circulars/letters. 11. In this manner; I feel that the opinion of Wajihuddin Ahmed, C.J., as he then was, is an expression of the correct statement of law and I accordingly agree with him and allow these petitions by declaring all notices, demands, recoveries and collections pertaining to advance income-tax from the petitioner on goods which are not cleared for home consumption but which -only find way into bonds/warehouses, to be without jurisdiction, unconstitutional, void ab initio and of no legal effect. This would also be the order of the Court by majority of two against two against one. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-14 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem