EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark Messrs BP PAKISTAN EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION INC, KARACHI vs COMMISSIONER INLAND REVENUE ZONE-III, LTU, KARACHI I.T.A. No.879-KB of 2012 I.T.A. No.879-KB of 2012 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: Messrs BP PAKISTAN EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION INC, KARACHI Respondant: COMMISSIONER INLAND REVENUE ZONE-III, LTU, KARACHI I.T.A. No.879-KB of 2012 Result: Appeal dismissed Judgment Date: 2016-03-28 Court: Appellate Tribunal Inland Revenue Judges: Abdul Nasir Butt Aaliya Latif Unar Citations Advocates Statutes 2018 P T D (Trib.) 691 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER Through this miscellaneous application, the taxpayer has requested court for condonation of delay in filing of appeal before the Tribunal in I.T.A. No.879/KB/2012 dated 08.11.2012. The contents of the Application are reproduced hereunder:-- 1) Through this application , the above named applicant seeks condonation for delay in filing of the subject appeal filed under the cover of our letter DT1572 dated November 8, 2012. 2) This appeal has been preferred against order dated June 27, 2012 framed under section 129 of the Ordinance, which was served on the AR of the appellant on June 28, 2012. 3) It is respectfully brought into your knowledge that the appellant had assigned its entire working interest to another petroleum Exploration and production company effective January 1, 2011. The transaction was completed upon completion of all necessary formalities and approvals of the Government of Pakistan on September 15, 2011. 4) As and from the effective date, the employees of the appellant were hired and employed by the aforementioned assignee Petroleum Exploration and production company i.e. to whom the working interest of the appellant had been assigned. 5) The appeal papers were sent to the applicant for signing and for filing of appeal with the Honourable Tribunal however, due to the transfer of records and employed as said above, the appeal paper were inadvertently missed out and did not reach the principal officer of the appellant for singing. Therefore, the appeal was not filed in time. 6) On facts of the circumstances of the case discussed above, it is, therefore respectfully prayed to kindly condone the delay of 2 days in filing the impugned support of this application is also enclosed." 2. Mr. Qadeer Ahmed, FC appeared on behalf of the Taxpayer/ Applicant and submitted that the delay in filing of appeal was neither deliberate nor intentional but due to transfer of records and employees, the appeals papers, were inadvertently missed out and did not reach the principle officer of the taxpayer for signing, hence delay of 72 days was caused which may be condoned. 3. It was pointed out by the learned D.R. that appeal filed by the Taxpayer/Appellant is barred by 72 days and no plausible explanation was offered by the Appellant, therefore, the appeal is liable to be dismissed. 4. We have heard the leaned representatives from both the parties and have also gone through the contents of the miscellaneous application as well as the record of the case. After thoughtful consideration of the case records, we are of the opinion that it has been constant view of the superior court that for administration of justice principle has to be followed "law would support vigilant and not indolent", therefore, any delay in filing appeal is to be considered negligent on the part of that party, thus, the other party should not be penalized for such negligence. We, therefore, decline to accept the application filed for condonation of delay as prayed for by the taxpayer and dismiss the main appeal being hopelessly time barred. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Appellate Tribunal Inland Revenue Judge(s): Abdul Nasir Butt, Aaliya Latif Unar Title: Messrs BP PAKISTAN EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION INC, KARACHI vs COMMISSIONER INLAND REVENUE ZONE-III, LTU, KARACHI I.T.A. No.879-KB of 2012 Case No.: I.T.A. No.879-KB of 2012 Date of Judgment: 2016-03-28 Reported As: 2018 P T D (Trib.) 691 Result: Appeal dismissed Judgment ORDER Through this miscellaneous application, the taxpayer has requested court for condonation of delay in filing of appeal before the Tribunal in I.T.A. No.879/KB/2012 dated 08.11.2012. The contents of the Application are reproduced hereunder:-- 1) Through this application , the above named applicant seeks condonation for delay in filing of the subject appeal filed under the cover of our letter DT1572 dated November 8, 2012. 2) This appeal has been preferred against order dated June 27, 2012 framed under section 129 of the Ordinance, which was served on the AR of the appellant on June 28, 2012. 3) It is respectfully brought into your knowledge that the appellant had assigned its entire working interest to another petroleum Exploration and production company effective January 1, 2011. The transaction was completed upon completion of all necessary formalities and approvals of the Government of Pakistan on September 15, 2011. 4) As and from the effective date, the employees of the appellant were hired and employed by the aforementioned assignee Petroleum Exploration and production company i.e. to whom the working interest of the appellant had been assigned. 5) The appeal papers were sent to the applicant for signing and for filing of appeal with the Honourable Tribunal however, due to the transfer of records and employed as said above, the appeal paper were inadvertently missed out and did not reach the principal officer of the appellant for singing. Therefore, the appeal was not filed in time. 6) On facts of the circumstances of the case discussed above, it is, therefore respectfully prayed to kindly condone the delay of 2 days in filing the impugned support of this application is also enclosed." 2. Mr. Qadeer Ahmed, FC appeared on behalf of the Taxpayer/ Applicant and submitted that the delay in filing of appeal was neither deliberate nor intentional but due to transfer of records and employees, the appeals papers, were inadvertently missed out and did not reach the principle officer of the taxpayer for signing, hence delay of 72 days was caused which may be condoned. 3. It was pointed out by the learned D.R. that appeal filed by the Taxpayer/Appellant is barred by 72 days and no plausible explanation was offered by the Appellant, therefore, the appeal is liable to be dismissed. 4. We have heard the leaned representatives from both the parties and have also gone through the contents of the miscellaneous application as well as the record of the case. After thoughtful consideration of the case records, we are of the opinion that it has been constant view of the superior court that for administration of justice principle has to be followed "law would support vigilant and not indolent", therefore, any delay in filing appeal is to be considered negligent on the part of that party, thus, the other party should not be penalized for such negligence. We, therefore, decline to accept the application filed for condonation of delay as prayed for by the taxpayer and dismiss the main appeal being hopelessly time barred. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem