EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark MOHAMMAD NAWAZ And Other vs PIR RAKHSH And Other R.O.R. Nos. 1727,1728,1729 of 1987 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: MOHAMMAD NAWAZ And Other Respondant: PIR RAKHSH And Other Result: N/A Judgment Date: 1992-08-07 Court: Board of Revenue, Punjab Judges: Akhatar Said Citations Advocates Statutes K.L.R. 1992 Revenue Cases 52 Judgment ORDER The parties, facts and law involved are the same in the three revision petitions. They shall therefore be disposed of by one order. FACTS: The scheme of village Thul Wazir Khan was confirmed on 25.12.1984. The petitioners were joint owners in Khata No.2 with the respondents at the time, and under three different Wandas their shares of the joint holdings came to 40 kanals. The respondents appealed against this allotment to the Additional Deputy Commissioner (Cons.) alleging that they are owners of the whole land on the basis of mutation No.253 of 28.9.1945, through which the ancestor of the petitioners had sold 1/2 of 80 kanals of his land as ([(urdu text)]) Somehow this mutation was never entered in any jamabandi. The Additional Deputy Commissioner(Cons.) on 18.8.1985 accepted the appeal and ordered that mutation No.253 should be given effect to, and on that basis the ownership of the parties should be determined in consolidation. The petitioners went to the court of the Additional Commissioner (Consolidation) who on 17.5.1987 decided to uphold the decision of the Additional Deputy Commissioner (Consolidation). The petitioners have now come up in the present revision against the order of the Additional Commissioner (Consolidation) dated 17.5.1987. ARGUMENTS 1. Actually there is only one legal question involved in the present case i. e. Whether a mutation sanctioned in 1945, but never entered in any periodical record or record of rights, could be accepted as a basis for change in the record of rights in 1985. The law on this matter is very clear and has been repeatedly laid down by superior courts, and that is that mutations are summary proceedings and whenever there is any complicated question of law or fact, it cannot be clinched by the summary proceedings of mutations. No detailed evidence is taken at the time of attestation of mutations and for the same reason they do not determine the parties rights. It has been held repeatedly that long standing entries in periodical record or record of rights are a. Stronger piece of evidence than a mutation which ' has not been entered in them. In such a situation, instead of changing these records after a long period, the law envisages the evaluation of both pieces of evidence namely the non-entered mutation and long existing entries in the record, by a proper court i.e. a civil court, which has the authority to frame issues, take evidence and evaluate that evidence to arrive at a conclusion, It would be against time-honoured principles of revenue administration to recognize a mutation against 40 years of entry of ownership in the record of rights. 2. The above position is particularly valid for the consolidation authorities who are supposed only to take up where the revenue authorities have last left of, and not go beyond the record that they have taken over from the latter. In other words it would give the consolidation authorities a dangerous latitude if they were permitted to look into the wires of entries in [(urdu text)] is not their function at all. The consolidation authorities have clearly gone*e much beyond their legitimate role by recognizing the mutation which has not figured in the record of rights for four decades. If they had this authority they could open Pandoras boxes at the time of each consolidation operation, and instead of doing their restricted duties under the law of consolidation, they would get entangled in matters which are best left to other authorities. The function of the consolidation authorities is temporary and of a specific character. 3. The argument that the respondents have been entered in the cultivation column of certain Jambandis as [(urdu text)] will be of no assistance to them in the present case. This is a settled procedure that if in a, joint khata a certain owner is also a cultivator, he is entered as [(urdu text)] regardless of the size of his ownership. In the present case it is not e* record whether the respondents had not come to awn some other land in the same Khata when they were recorded as cultivators [(urdu text)]. In any case they do not figure as owner in the Jamabandi. However this might be weighed as a piece of evidence by the proper court where this matter was agitated. The present court cannot decide on this here. 4. As regards their own admissions in the grounds of appeals and revisions, that they are inheritor under ancestor who had entered into mutation No.255 of [(urdu text)] in favour of ancestor of the respondents, this cannot form the basis for the consolidation authorities to go beyond the [(urdu text)] This may or may not be a strong piece of evidence to frustrate their stand against mutation No.253, but this has to be assessed and determined by a civil court. It would be wrong for revenue authorities to be correcting their old record on the basis of assertions, admissions and denials made in pleadings. 5. Because of the above arguments I accept the revision petition and order that the impugned order as well as the order of the Additional Deputy Commissioner (Cons) shall not form the basis of the distribution of Wandas between the parties; in other words mutation No. 253 shall not be taken into account for the purpose of consolidation of holdings of the parties. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue, Punjab Judge(s): Akhatar Said Title: MOHAMMAD NAWAZ And Other vs PIR RAKHSH And Other Case No.: R.O.R. Nos. 1727,1728,1729 of 1987 Date of Judgment: 1992-08-07 Reported As: K.L.R. 1992 Revenue Cases 52 Result: N/A Judgment ORDER The parties, facts and law involved are the same in the three revision petitions. They shall therefore be disposed of by one order. FACTS: The scheme of village Thul Wazir Khan was confirmed on 25.12.1984. The petitioners were joint owners in Khata No.2 with the respondents at the time, and under three different Wandas their shares of the joint holdings came to 40 kanals. The respondents appealed against this allotment to the Additional Deputy Commissioner (Cons.) alleging that they are owners of the whole land on the basis of mutation No.253 of 28.9.1945, through which the ancestor of the petitioners had sold 1/2 of 80 kanals of his land as ([(urdu text)]) Somehow this mutation was never entered in any jamabandi. The Additional Deputy Commissioner(Cons.) on 18.8.1985 accepted the appeal and ordered that mutation No.253 should be given effect to, and on that basis the ownership of the parties should be determined in consolidation. The petitioners went to the court of the Additional Commissioner (Consolidation) who on 17.5.1987 decided to uphold the decision of the Additional Deputy Commissioner (Consolidation). The petitioners have now come up in the present revision against the order of the Additional Commissioner (Consolidation) dated 17.5.1987. ARGUMENTS 1. Actually there is only one legal question involved in the present case i. e. Whether a mutation sanctioned in 1945, but never entered in any periodical record or record of rights, could be accepted as a basis for change in the record of rights in 1985. The law on this matter is very clear and has been repeatedly laid down by superior courts, and that is that mutations are summary proceedings and whenever there is any complicated question of law or fact, it cannot be clinched by the summary proceedings of mutations. No detailed evidence is taken at the time of attestation of mutations and for the same reason they do not determine the parties rights. It has been held repeatedly that long standing entries in periodical record or record of rights are a. Stronger piece of evidence than a mutation which ' has not been entered in them. In such a situation, instead of changing these records after a long period, the law envisages the evaluation of both pieces of evidence namely the non-entered mutation and long existing entries in the record, by a proper court i.e. a civil court, which has the authority to frame issues, take evidence and evaluate that evidence to arrive at a conclusion, It would be against time-honoured principles of revenue administration to recognize a mutation against 40 years of entry of ownership in the record of rights. 2. The above position is particularly valid for the consolidation authorities who are supposed only to take up where the revenue authorities have last left of, and not go beyond the record that they have taken over from the latter. In other words it would give the consolidation authorities a dangerous latitude if they were permitted to look into the wires of entries in [(urdu text)] is not their function at all. The consolidation authorities have clearly gone*e much beyond their legitimate role by recognizing the mutation which has not figured in the record of rights for four decades. If they had this authority they could open Pandoras boxes at the time of each consolidation operation, and instead of doing their restricted duties under the law of consolidation, they would get entangled in matters which are best left to other authorities. The function of the consolidation authorities is temporary and of a specific character. 3. The argument that the respondents have been entered in the cultivation column of certain Jambandis as [(urdu text)] will be of no assistance to them in the present case. This is a settled procedure that if in a, joint khata a certain owner is also a cultivator, he is entered as [(urdu text)] regardless of the size of his ownership. In the present case it is not e* record whether the respondents had not come to awn some other land in the same Khata when they were recorded as cultivators [(urdu text)]. In any case they do not figure as owner in the Jamabandi. However this might be weighed as a piece of evidence by the proper court where this matter was agitated. The present court cannot decide on this here. 4. As regards their own admissions in the grounds of appeals and revisions, that they are inheritor under ancestor who had entered into mutation No.255 of [(urdu text)] in favour of ancestor of the respondents, this cannot form the basis for the consolidation authorities to go beyond the [(urdu text)] This may or may not be a strong piece of evidence to frustrate their stand against mutation No.253, but this has to be assessed and determined by a civil court. It would be wrong for revenue authorities to be correcting their old record on the basis of assertions, admissions and denials made in pleadings. 5. Because of the above arguments I accept the revision petition and order that the impugned order as well as the order of the Additional Deputy Commissioner (Cons) shall not form the basis of the distribution of Wandas between the parties; in other words mutation No. 253 shall not be taken into account for the purpose of consolidation of holdings of the parties. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem