EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark MOHAMMAD BAKHSH vs The STATE Criminal Miscellaneous No. 65 of 1970 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: MOHAMMAD BAKHSH Respondant: The STATE Result: Petition dismissed Judgment Date: 1970-03-04 Court: Baghdad-ul-Jadid Judges: A. R. Sheikh Citations Advocates Statutes 1972 P Cr. L J 705 Judgment ORDER A. R. Sheikh, J.—Learned counsel for the State argues that the preventive measures under sections 107 and 151 of the Code of Criminal Procedure being not an offence under the Pakistan Penal Code, no question of compounding the same arises under section 345, Cr. P. C. He farther argues that section 494, Cr. P. C does not apply to proceedings under Chapter VHI and, therefore, proceedings under section 107, Cr. P. C. can be terminated only under section 119, Cr. P. C. In this regard he relies on The King v. Ba Khin and others (l). He maintains that in the circumstances the Assistant Commissioner, Ahmadpur East, has in no manner acted against law and the objection raised against the procedure adopted by him, urged as a ground for transfer of the case from his Court, is without force. Mr. M. M. A. Pirzada, Advocate, appearing for the petitioner, has not been able to meet this argument. 2. The other ground urged that the learned Magistrate in refusing to accept sureties in the iirst instance has created an apprehension in the mind of the petitioner that he would not get a fair trial at the hands of the Magistrate is also without merit. The petition fails and is dismissed. . (1) AIR 1940 Rang. 189 www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Baghdad-ul-Jadid Judge(s): A. R. Sheikh Title: MOHAMMAD BAKHSH vs The STATE Case No.: Criminal Miscellaneous No. 65 of 1970 Date of Judgment: 1970-03-04 Reported As: 1972 P Cr. L J 705 Result: Petition dismissed Judgment ORDER A. R. Sheikh, J.—Learned counsel for the State argues that the preventive measures under sections 107 and 151 of the Code of Criminal Procedure being not an offence under the Pakistan Penal Code, no question of compounding the same arises under section 345, Cr. P. C. He farther argues that section 494, Cr. P. C does not apply to proceedings under Chapter VHI and, therefore, proceedings under section 107, Cr. P. C. can be terminated only under section 119, Cr. P. C. In this regard he relies on The King v. Ba Khin and others (l). He maintains that in the circumstances the Assistant Commissioner, Ahmadpur East, has in no manner acted against law and the objection raised against the procedure adopted by him, urged as a ground for transfer of the case from his Court, is without force. Mr. M. M. A. Pirzada, Advocate, appearing for the petitioner, has not been able to meet this argument. 2. The other ground urged that the learned Magistrate in refusing to accept sureties in the iirst instance has created an apprehension in the mind of the petitioner that he would not get a fair trial at the hands of the Magistrate is also without merit. The petition fails and is dismissed. . (1) AIR 1940 Rang. 189 Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem