EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark Mst. SHAZIA PARVEEN vs MUHAMMAD ASHRAF Transfer Application No,373-C of 2001 Judgment Details Cited by 1 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: Mst. SHAZIA PARVEEN Respondant: MUHAMMAD ASHRAF Result: Case transferred Judgment Date: 2001-11-20 Court: Lahore High Court Judges: Falak Sher Citations Advocates Statutes 2002 M L D 1428 Subsequent References Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER Mst. Shazia Parveen petitioner's matrimony solemnized with Muhammad Ashraf respondent on 9-6-2001 deferring Rukhasti which didn't mature on account of estrangement, conversely she filed a suit for dissolution of marriage (No,1479-FC of 3-9-2001) titled "Mst. Shazia Parveen v. Muhammad Ashraf" pending adjudication before Ms. Samina Hayat, Judge Family Court, Lahore to which the respondent responded with a Suit for restitution of conjugal rights (No,1326-FC) of even date styled as "Muhammad Ashraf v. Shazia Parveen" before Ms. Afshan Ijaz Sooti, Judge Family Court, Faisalabad for seeking transfer whereof to Lahore has re-coursed to the present petition, urging feminine convenience and to avoid contradictory judgments. 2. Wherein despite repeated service effected through multitudinous processes viz. Under registered cover A/D in addition to telegraphic communication and ordinary process the respondent has opted not to join the proceedings thus is proceeded against ex pane. ' Consequently persuaded by the contentions urged being well based duly borne out from the appendices and having remained uncontroverted granting the petition the respondent's aforementioned suit is transferred from Faisalabad to Lahore for its adjudication by the Court seized of the petitioner's suit referred to supra. Case transferred. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Lahore High Court Judge(s): Falak Sher Title: Mst. SHAZIA PARVEEN vs MUHAMMAD ASHRAF Case No.: Transfer Application No,373-C of 2001 Date of Judgment: 2001-11-20 Reported As: 2002 M L D 1428 Result: Case transferred Judgment ORDER Mst. Shazia Parveen petitioner's matrimony solemnized with Muhammad Ashraf respondent on 9-6-2001 deferring Rukhasti which didn't mature on account of estrangement, conversely she filed a suit for dissolution of marriage (No,1479-FC of 3-9-2001) titled "Mst. Shazia Parveen v. Muhammad Ashraf" pending adjudication before Ms. Samina Hayat, Judge Family Court, Lahore to which the respondent responded with a Suit for restitution of conjugal rights (No,1326-FC) of even date styled as "Muhammad Ashraf v. Shazia Parveen" before Ms. Afshan Ijaz Sooti, Judge Family Court, Faisalabad for seeking transfer whereof to Lahore has re-coursed to the present petition, urging feminine convenience and to avoid contradictory judgments. 2. Wherein despite repeated service effected through multitudinous processes viz. Under registered cover A/D in addition to telegraphic communication and ordinary process the respondent has opted not to join the proceedings thus is proceeded against ex pane. ' Consequently persuaded by the contentions urged being well based duly borne out from the appendices and having remained uncontroverted granting the petition the respondent's aforementioned suit is transferred from Faisalabad to Lahore for its adjudication by the Court seized of the petitioner's suit referred to supra. Case transferred. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-14 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem