EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark Mst. FARIDA KAUSAR vs MUHAMMAD ASHFAQ Transfer Application No,339 of 2001 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: Mst. FARIDA KAUSAR Respondant: MUHAMMAD ASHFAQ Result: Application allowed Judgment Date: 2002-10-16 Court: Lahore High Court Judges: Falak Sher Author Citations Advocates Statutes 2003 M L D 1747 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER Petitioner's matrimony solemnized with the respondent on 29-9-2000 (vide Nikah Nama Annex. A) soon fell prey to estrangement culminating into pronouncement of divorce unto her on 21-11-2000 whereafter she filed suit claiming maintenance (No,718-FC of 18-4-2001) titled "Mst. Farida Kausar v. Muhammad Ishfaq" pending adjudication before Ms. Shah Zadi Najaf, Judge Family Court, Lahore while the respondent has filed a suit for recovery of golden ornaments worth Rs,1,00,000 (No,82 of 13-6-2001) styled as "Muhammad Ashfaque v. Mst. Farida and another" before Mr. Muhammad Jawad Alam Qureshi, Judge Family Court, Pasrur District Sialkot for seeking transfer whereof to Lahore has re-coursed to the present petition urging feminine convenience and to avoid contradictory judgments. 2. Wherein despite service effected through multitudinal processes viz. Under registered cover A/D in addition to telegraphic communication and ordinary process the respondent has opted not to join the proceedings thus is proceeded against ex parte. 3. Consequently persuaded by the contentions urged being well-based, duly borne out from the appendices and having remained uncontroverted granting the petition the respondent's aforementioned suit is transferred from Pasrur District Sialkot to Lahore for its adjudication by the Court already seized of the petitioner's suit referred to supra. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Lahore High Court Judge(s): Falak Sher Title: Mst. FARIDA KAUSAR vs MUHAMMAD ASHFAQ Case No.: Transfer Application No,339 of 2001 Date of Judgment: 2002-10-16 Reported As: 2003 M L D 1747 Result: Application allowed Judgment ORDER Petitioner's matrimony solemnized with the respondent on 29-9-2000 (vide Nikah Nama Annex. A) soon fell prey to estrangement culminating into pronouncement of divorce unto her on 21-11-2000 whereafter she filed suit claiming maintenance (No,718-FC of 18-4-2001) titled "Mst. Farida Kausar v. Muhammad Ishfaq" pending adjudication before Ms. Shah Zadi Najaf, Judge Family Court, Lahore while the respondent has filed a suit for recovery of golden ornaments worth Rs,1,00,000 (No,82 of 13-6-2001) styled as "Muhammad Ashfaque v. Mst. Farida and another" before Mr. Muhammad Jawad Alam Qureshi, Judge Family Court, Pasrur District Sialkot for seeking transfer whereof to Lahore has re-coursed to the present petition urging feminine convenience and to avoid contradictory judgments. 2. Wherein despite service effected through multitudinal processes viz. Under registered cover A/D in addition to telegraphic communication and ordinary process the respondent has opted not to join the proceedings thus is proceeded against ex parte. 3. Consequently persuaded by the contentions urged being well-based, duly borne out from the appendices and having remained uncontroverted granting the petition the respondent's aforementioned suit is transferred from Pasrur District Sialkot to Lahore for its adjudication by the Court already seized of the petitioner's suit referred to supra. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-14 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem