EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark Mst. REHMAT BIBI vs THE STATE Criminal Miscellaneous No. 318/Q of 1972 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: Mst. REHMAT BIBI Respondant: THE STATE Result: accordingly allow Judgment Date: 1972-07-25 Court: Lahore High Court Judges: Muhammad Afzal Cheema Author Citations Advocates Statutes 1973 P Cr. L J 246 Judgment ORDER This is a petition for partial quashing of proceedings pending against the petitioner and others under sections 354 and 452, P.P. C. In the Court of Mr. M. Ria:, M. I. C., Khanewal, The case was registered at P. S. Mian Channu on 1st February 1972 on the report of Mst. Khurshid Bibi complainant. According to the allegations contained therein, ten or eleven days earlier; at about 8/9 p. m. While she was sitting alone in her house and was performing ablution for offering Isha prayers, Mst. Rehmat Bibi, present petitioner, came there, sat with her for a while, and, on inquiry, being told that the complainant's husband and son were out of station, she left. Soon thereafter, Sarang, Ramzan, Nizai and Ali accused armed with lathis trespassed into the house in spite of her protest that she was a purdahnashin lady, gave her a beating, and dragged her outside in the lane. Several persons were attracted to the spot by an alarm when the accused left her and ran away. She sustained six injuries on the knee, back, thigh and head. On the next morning she accompanied by Sardara Mirassi went in search of her husband who had, gone on a visit to his Murid. On return she got herself medically examined and lodged the report. In the course of investigation the police found the petitioner and one Nizam as innocent and placed them in Col. 2. 2. After examining Mst. Khurshid Bibi complainant who appeared as P.W. 2, and her husband Shah Jamal, P. W. 1, whose statement was based on the information received by him from his wife, the learned trial Magistrate summoned the accused persons. The learned Magistrate also summoned the petitioner. 3. Having been taken through the statement of Mst. Khurahid Bibi made in Court I find that she had not named the petitioner as the lady who had visited her in the first instance and, after her departure, the other accused had trespassed into the house; similarly Shah Jamal, the husband of the complainant, whose testimony was based on the information received by his at the hands of his wife, Mst. Khurshid Bibi, complainant, did no name the petitioner as the lady. Accordingly there was hardly any justification for the petitioner to have summoned the accused persons. There is ample authority for the proposition that the proceedings can be partially quashed. I accordingly allow the petition and partially quash the proceedings in so far as the petitioner is concerned. These shall, however, continue in so far as the other accused are concerned. Proceedings partially quashed. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Lahore High Court Judge(s): Muhammad Afzal Cheema Title: Mst. REHMAT BIBI vs THE STATE Case No.: Criminal Miscellaneous No. 318/Q of 1972 Date of Judgment: 1972-07-25 Reported As: 1973 P Cr. L J 246 Result: accordingly allow Judgment ORDER This is a petition for partial quashing of proceedings pending against the petitioner and others under sections 354 and 452, P.P. C. In the Court of Mr. M. Ria:, M. I. C., Khanewal, The case was registered at P. S. Mian Channu on 1st February 1972 on the report of Mst. Khurshid Bibi complainant. According to the allegations contained therein, ten or eleven days earlier; at about 8/9 p. m. While she was sitting alone in her house and was performing ablution for offering Isha prayers, Mst. Rehmat Bibi, present petitioner, came there, sat with her for a while, and, on inquiry, being told that the complainant's husband and son were out of station, she left. Soon thereafter, Sarang, Ramzan, Nizai and Ali accused armed with lathis trespassed into the house in spite of her protest that she was a purdahnashin lady, gave her a beating, and dragged her outside in the lane. Several persons were attracted to the spot by an alarm when the accused left her and ran away. She sustained six injuries on the knee, back, thigh and head. On the next morning she accompanied by Sardara Mirassi went in search of her husband who had, gone on a visit to his Murid. On return she got herself medically examined and lodged the report. In the course of investigation the police found the petitioner and one Nizam as innocent and placed them in Col. 2. 2. After examining Mst. Khurshid Bibi complainant who appeared as P.W. 2, and her husband Shah Jamal, P. W. 1, whose statement was based on the information received by him from his wife, the learned trial Magistrate summoned the accused persons. The learned Magistrate also summoned the petitioner. 3. Having been taken through the statement of Mst. Khurahid Bibi made in Court I find that she had not named the petitioner as the lady who had visited her in the first instance and, after her departure, the other accused had trespassed into the house; similarly Shah Jamal, the husband of the complainant, whose testimony was based on the information received by his at the hands of his wife, Mst. Khurshid Bibi, complainant, did no name the petitioner as the lady. Accordingly there was hardly any justification for the petitioner to have summoned the accused persons. There is ample authority for the proposition that the proceedings can be partially quashed. I accordingly allow the petition and partially quash the proceedings in so far as the petitioner is concerned. These shall, however, continue in so far as the other accused are concerned. Proceedings partially quashed. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-14 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem