EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark MUHAMMAD AND OTHERS vs MUHAMMAD ROSHAN AND OTHERS R. 0. R. No,. 2712 of 1982, Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: MUHAMMAD AND OTHERS Respondant: MUHAMMAD ROSHAN AND OTHERS Result: Petition dismissed Judgment Date: 1982-11-29 Court: Board of Revenue Judges: Anwar Zahid Citations Advocates Statutes P L D 1983 Rev. 51 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' This is a revision petition against the order of the Additional Commissioner (Consolidation), Sargodha Division, dated 17-10-1982, whereby the order of the District Collector, Hianw8 dated 31-7-1982 was set aside and it was ordered that the entries should remain as they were prior to the order impugned before him. 2. The D. C./District Collector, Mianwali, vide order, dated 31-7-1982, accepted the application of the petitioners for correction of Khasra Girdawari pertaining to Killas Nos, 1 to 10 of Rectangle No,. 683, Killas Nos, 1 to 10 of Rectangle No,. 84 Killa No,. 10/2 of Rectangle No,. 682 and Killas Nos, 1, 2 and 8 to 10 of Rectangle No,. 685. Against that order the respondents preferred an appeal before the Additional Commissioner (Consolidation), Sargodha Division, who set aside the order of the D. C./District Collector, Mianwaii and ordered that the entries should remain as they were prior to the order impugned before him. 3. I have heard the counsel for the petitioners and have gone through the orders of the lower Courts. The contentions raised by the counsel have been considered. While setting aside the order of the D. C./District Collector, the Additional Commissioner (Consolidation) observed in the impugned order that the application for correction of Khasra Girdawari was made after more than ;0 years to get the land under Land Reforms and that there was no justification for accepting the application made after such an inordinate delay. The impugned order is well-based. 1 see no sound reason to interfere with it. The same is maintained and the revision petition is dismissed in limine. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue Judge(s): Anwar Zahid Title: MUHAMMAD AND OTHERS vs MUHAMMAD ROSHAN AND OTHERS Case No.: R. 0. R. No,. 2712 of 1982, Date of Judgment: 1982-11-29 Reported As: P L D 1983 Rev. 51 Result: Petition dismissed Judgment ORDER ' This is a revision petition against the order of the Additional Commissioner (Consolidation), Sargodha Division, dated 17-10-1982, whereby the order of the District Collector, Hianw8 dated 31-7-1982 was set aside and it was ordered that the entries should remain as they were prior to the order impugned before him. 2. The D. C./District Collector, Mianwali, vide order, dated 31-7-1982, accepted the application of the petitioners for correction of Khasra Girdawari pertaining to Killas Nos, 1 to 10 of Rectangle No,. 683, Killas Nos, 1 to 10 of Rectangle No,. 84 Killa No,. 10/2 of Rectangle No,. 682 and Killas Nos, 1, 2 and 8 to 10 of Rectangle No,. 685. Against that order the respondents preferred an appeal before the Additional Commissioner (Consolidation), Sargodha Division, who set aside the order of the D. C./District Collector, Mianwaii and ordered that the entries should remain as they were prior to the order impugned before him. 3. I have heard the counsel for the petitioners and have gone through the orders of the lower Courts. The contentions raised by the counsel have been considered. While setting aside the order of the D. C./District Collector, the Additional Commissioner (Consolidation) observed in the impugned order that the application for correction of Khasra Girdawari was made after more than ;0 years to get the land under Land Reforms and that there was no justification for accepting the application made after such an inordinate delay. The impugned order is well-based. 1 see no sound reason to interfere with it. The same is maintained and the revision petition is dismissed in limine. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem