EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark MUHAMMAD IBRAHIM AND 3 OTHERS vs Moulvi ABDUL REHMAN AND 2 OTHERS Case No, S.R.O.R. 518 of 1971-72, Judgment Details Cited by 2 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: MUHAMMAD IBRAHIM AND 3 OTHERS Respondant: Moulvi ABDUL REHMAN AND 2 OTHERS Result: Review rejected. Judgment Date: 1977-12-05 Court: Board of Revenue, Balochistan Judges: Abdullah Baloch Citations Advocates Statutes P L D 1986 Rev. 37 Subsequent References Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' This is a revision petition against the order dated 26-4-1972 of the learned. Revenue Commissioner, Sind, rejecting the appeal of the petitioners in respect of purchase of B. Nos. 11/1 to 4 and others of Deh Bothero, Taluka Sinjhoro. 2. Facts of the case are already given in the impugned order and need not be reproduced. 3. Heard the counsels for the parties on 1-12-1977 and perused the impugned order when the orders were reserved for today. The main contentions of the counsel for the petitioners are that the two sons of the respondent Moulvi Abdur Rehman were minors at the time of the disposal of the disputed land and that they were not sitting tenants. These points have been dealt with elaboratory by the learned Revenue Commissioner vide his order impugned here. In the definition of "Tenant" as contained in the Sind Tenancy Act, 1950 and the West Pakistan Land Revenue Act, 1967, there is no bar upon minor from being considered as tenants of the land. The respondents were covered by the definition "sitting tenants" and were, therefore, entitled to purchase of the surrendered land in question under the scheme in which the land surrendered under M. L. R. 89 was disposed of to them. The counsel for the petitioners is not able to rebut the findings contained in the impugned order which is comprehensive and quite appropriate in the circumstances of the case and there is no ground for interference with the same. The revision petition merits no consideration which is hereby rejected. Revision rejected. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue, Balochistan Judge(s): Abdullah Baloch Title: MUHAMMAD IBRAHIM AND 3 OTHERS vs Moulvi ABDUL REHMAN AND 2 OTHERS Case No.: Case No, S.R.O.R. 518 of 1971-72, Date of Judgment: 1977-12-05 Reported As: P L D 1986 Rev. 37 Result: Review rejected. Judgment ORDER ' This is a revision petition against the order dated 26-4-1972 of the learned. Revenue Commissioner, Sind, rejecting the appeal of the petitioners in respect of purchase of B. Nos. 11/1 to 4 and others of Deh Bothero, Taluka Sinjhoro. 2. Facts of the case are already given in the impugned order and need not be reproduced. 3. Heard the counsels for the parties on 1-12-1977 and perused the impugned order when the orders were reserved for today. The main contentions of the counsel for the petitioners are that the two sons of the respondent Moulvi Abdur Rehman were minors at the time of the disposal of the disputed land and that they were not sitting tenants. These points have been dealt with elaboratory by the learned Revenue Commissioner vide his order impugned here. In the definition of "Tenant" as contained in the Sind Tenancy Act, 1950 and the West Pakistan Land Revenue Act, 1967, there is no bar upon minor from being considered as tenants of the land. The respondents were covered by the definition "sitting tenants" and were, therefore, entitled to purchase of the surrendered land in question under the scheme in which the land surrendered under M. L. R. 89 was disposed of to them. The counsel for the petitioners is not able to rebut the findings contained in the impugned order which is comprehensive and quite appropriate in the circumstances of the case and there is no ground for interference with the same. The revision petition merits no consideration which is hereby rejected. Revision rejected. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem