EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark MUHAMMAD RAHIM vs MUHAMMAD ASLAM S. R. 0. No, 2872 of 1972-73 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: MUHAMMAD RAHIM Respondant: MUHAMMAD ASLAM Result: Appeal allowed Judgment Date: 1973-03-28 Court: Board of Revenue Judges: Additional Member Board of Revenue Citations Advocates Statutes P L D 1985 Rev. 91 [Sind] Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' This is an appeal against the order dated 2-2-1972 of the learned Revenue Officer, Kotri Barrage, Hyderabad, whereby, B. No, 154/2, 3 and B. No, 153/2. 3, were granted to the respondents Muhammad Malik and Muhammad Aslam, respectively on Harap condintions. 2. The counsel for the appellant contended that the disputed land alongwith other land was granted to the petitioner by the Barrage Authorities for Rabi 1958-59 on Harap tenure and after issue of necessary Ijazatnama, he was put in possession of the land. Due to shortage of water supply and also the land being at the tail of the Khairsar Shakh the appellant could not cultivate it. In support of his contentions he produced certificate issued by the X. E. N. Main line Division, which confirmed the position. He further contended that the respondent Muhammad Aslam was minor of about 8 years when the land was granted to him on Harap tenure. The respondent was, therefore, not entitled to the grant of the land on Harap tenure he being minor. In support of his contention, the counsel produced a certificate issued by the Headmaster, Government Primary School, Golarchi. It appears that some fictitious person was brought before the learned Revenue Officer at the time of Kachery. Similarly, respondent Muhammad Malik was also not entitled to the grant of land on Harap tenure as he had settled in Sind in that year only, hence he could not fulfil the conditions of grant of land on Harap tenure. He further added that the grant of the appellant made in the year 1958 was not liable to cancellation as the appellant could not cultivate the land due to shortage of water. Moreover, it was also incumbent on the Barrage Authorities to have informed the appellant about the cancellation of the grant and disposal of land when he happens to be resident of the Deh. 3. The attorney of the respondent Malik contended that it was not a fact that due to shortage of water the appellant had failed to cultivate the land but as a matter of fact, he had abandoned the idea of cultivating the land. The respondent Muhammad Aslam however, admitted that he was a minor boy when the land was granted to him in the year 1970. The respondents were unable to produce any documentary evidence to prove that they had come to Sind area prior to the disposal of land to them. 4. Heard the arguments and perused the record. The names of the respondents are not shown in the Khasra Girdwari to indicate their geninueness of being Haris. The respondent Muhammad Aslam who was present in the Court was hardly of 12 pears of age and obviously, therefore, he was not entitled to the grant of land on Harap tenure he being minor. Similarly respondent Muhammad Malik is not Hari by profession as his name does not find place in the Khasra Girdwari. Moreover, the appellant was not informed of the cancellation of the grant. 5. In view of the facts mentioned above, I uphold the appeal and direct that arrears with penal interest be recovered from the appellant and B land re-granted to him. The order of the learned Revenue Officer, Kotri Barrage granting the land to the respondents is set aside. n ......1 www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue Judge(s): Additional Member Board of Revenue Title: MUHAMMAD RAHIM vs MUHAMMAD ASLAM Case No.: S. R. 0. No, 2872 of 1972-73 Date of Judgment: 1973-03-28 Reported As: P L D 1985 Rev. 91 [Sind] Result: Appeal allowed Judgment ORDER ' This is an appeal against the order dated 2-2-1972 of the learned Revenue Officer, Kotri Barrage, Hyderabad, whereby, B. No, 154/2, 3 and B. No, 153/2. 3, were granted to the respondents Muhammad Malik and Muhammad Aslam, respectively on Harap condintions. 2. The counsel for the appellant contended that the disputed land alongwith other land was granted to the petitioner by the Barrage Authorities for Rabi 1958-59 on Harap tenure and after issue of necessary Ijazatnama, he was put in possession of the land. Due to shortage of water supply and also the land being at the tail of the Khairsar Shakh the appellant could not cultivate it. In support of his contentions he produced certificate issued by the X. E. N. Main line Division, which confirmed the position. He further contended that the respondent Muhammad Aslam was minor of about 8 years when the land was granted to him on Harap tenure. The respondent was, therefore, not entitled to the grant of the land on Harap tenure he being minor. In support of his contention, the counsel produced a certificate issued by the Headmaster, Government Primary School, Golarchi. It appears that some fictitious person was brought before the learned Revenue Officer at the time of Kachery. Similarly, respondent Muhammad Malik was also not entitled to the grant of land on Harap tenure as he had settled in Sind in that year only, hence he could not fulfil the conditions of grant of land on Harap tenure. He further added that the grant of the appellant made in the year 1958 was not liable to cancellation as the appellant could not cultivate the land due to shortage of water. Moreover, it was also incumbent on the Barrage Authorities to have informed the appellant about the cancellation of the grant and disposal of land when he happens to be resident of the Deh. 3. The attorney of the respondent Malik contended that it was not a fact that due to shortage of water the appellant had failed to cultivate the land but as a matter of fact, he had abandoned the idea of cultivating the land. The respondent Muhammad Aslam however, admitted that he was a minor boy when the land was granted to him in the year 1970. The respondents were unable to produce any documentary evidence to prove that they had come to Sind area prior to the disposal of land to them. 4. Heard the arguments and perused the record. The names of the respondents are not shown in the Khasra Girdwari to indicate their geninueness of being Haris. The respondent Muhammad Aslam who was present in the Court was hardly of 12 pears of age and obviously, therefore, he was not entitled to the grant of land on Harap tenure he being minor. Similarly respondent Muhammad Malik is not Hari by profession as his name does not find place in the Khasra Girdwari. Moreover, the appellant was not informed of the cancellation of the grant. 5. In view of the facts mentioned above, I uphold the appeal and direct that arrears with penal interest be recovered from the appellant and B land re-granted to him. The order of the learned Revenue Officer, Kotri Barrage granting the land to the respondents is set aside. n ......1 Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem