EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark MUHAMMAD AMIR FAROOQUI vs THE STATE S. R. 0. A. No, 115 of 197748, Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: MUHAMMAD AMIR FAROOQUI Respondant: THE STATE Result: Appeal allowed Judgment Date: 1978-04-23 Court: Board of Revenue Judges: Abdul Sami Qureshi Citations Advocates Statutes P L D 1985 Rev. 159 [Sind] Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' This is an appeal against the order dated 4-3-1978 of the Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad in respect of B. No, 636/1 to 4 area 16 acres of Deh Mari Wassayo, Taluka Golarchi. 2. The petitioner is present with his counsel Mr, Bhimraj. He has been heard. 3. The disputed land was granted to the appellant by Assistant Revenue Officer, Kotri Barrage, Hyderabad vide his order dated 8-2-1977 on harap conditions. Asghar Ali and Muhammad Rafiq preferred an appeal against that grant. The appeal was upheld by the Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad vide the impugned order to the extent that the grant of the appellant was cancelled and the land was ordered to be disposed of afresh. Aggrieved by this order, the appellant has submitted the present appeal. 4. The grant of the appellant was cancelled by the learned Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad, mainly on the ground that he is neither eligible Hari nor resident of the Deh. The counsel for the appellant contends that the appellant is residing in the Deh since 1961 and that the land was previously on lease with his father and, therefore, the appellant was very much eligible to grant of the land. He has produced following documents in support of his contentions (i) School certificate of the appellant from Headmaster, Middle School Golarchi. (ii) Ijazatnama of lease of the land for the years 1968-69 to 1973-74 in favour of father of appellant. (iii) A Form No, TM/G-73/I in favour of father of the appellant in respect of grant of S. No, 749 and 750 on Deh Mari Wassayo with effect from Kharif 1961-62. 5. The representative of the Revenue Officer, has produced the correspondence of his office whict shows that Muhammad Rafique and Asghar All had withdrawn from their request for grant of the land before the Barrage Muaitiarkar and as such they had no cause for action against its grant to the appellant. 6. In view of the documents produced by the counsel, it appears that the appellant has been resident of the Deh since 1961-62 and that the land had been on lease with his father. Besides Asghar All and Muhammad A Rafiq had themselves withdrawn from the contest and, therefore, there was hardly any justification for disturbing the grant of the appellant on their appeal. 7. For the above reasons, the appeal is upheld and the grant in respect of disputed land is restored to the appellant. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue Judge(s): Abdul Sami Qureshi Title: MUHAMMAD AMIR FAROOQUI vs THE STATE Case No.: S. R. 0. A. No, 115 of 197748, Date of Judgment: 1978-04-23 Reported As: P L D 1985 Rev. 159 [Sind] Result: Appeal allowed Judgment ORDER ' This is an appeal against the order dated 4-3-1978 of the Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad in respect of B. No, 636/1 to 4 area 16 acres of Deh Mari Wassayo, Taluka Golarchi. 2. The petitioner is present with his counsel Mr, Bhimraj. He has been heard. 3. The disputed land was granted to the appellant by Assistant Revenue Officer, Kotri Barrage, Hyderabad vide his order dated 8-2-1977 on harap conditions. Asghar Ali and Muhammad Rafiq preferred an appeal against that grant. The appeal was upheld by the Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad vide the impugned order to the extent that the grant of the appellant was cancelled and the land was ordered to be disposed of afresh. Aggrieved by this order, the appellant has submitted the present appeal. 4. The grant of the appellant was cancelled by the learned Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad, mainly on the ground that he is neither eligible Hari nor resident of the Deh. The counsel for the appellant contends that the appellant is residing in the Deh since 1961 and that the land was previously on lease with his father and, therefore, the appellant was very much eligible to grant of the land. He has produced following documents in support of his contentions (i) School certificate of the appellant from Headmaster, Middle School Golarchi. (ii) Ijazatnama of lease of the land for the years 1968-69 to 1973-74 in favour of father of appellant. (iii) A Form No, TM/G-73/I in favour of father of the appellant in respect of grant of S. No, 749 and 750 on Deh Mari Wassayo with effect from Kharif 1961-62. 5. The representative of the Revenue Officer, has produced the correspondence of his office whict shows that Muhammad Rafique and Asghar All had withdrawn from their request for grant of the land before the Barrage Muaitiarkar and as such they had no cause for action against its grant to the appellant. 6. In view of the documents produced by the counsel, it appears that the appellant has been resident of the Deh since 1961-62 and that the land had been on lease with his father. Besides Asghar All and Muhammad A Rafiq had themselves withdrawn from the contest and, therefore, there was hardly any justification for disturbing the grant of the appellant on their appeal. 7. For the above reasons, the appeal is upheld and the grant in respect of disputed land is restored to the appellant. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem