EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark MUHAMMAD ASLAM vs AZAD GOVERNMENT OF THE STATE OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR, MUZAFFARABAD and 4 others Service Appeal No, 789 of 1994 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: MUHAMMAD ASLAM Respondant: AZAD GOVERNMENT OF THE STATE OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR, MUZAFFARABAD and 4 others Result: Appeal dismissed Judgment Date: 1996-11-21 Court: Azad Jammu and Kashmir Service Tribunal Judges: Raja Bashir Ahmad Khan Kh. Abdul Hameed Citations Advocates Statutes 1997 P L C (C.S.) 640 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT ' RAJA BASHIR AHMAD KHAN (CHAIRMAN).---This appeal has been filed against order No, 16 for the year 1993-94, dated 8-6-1994 whereby the appellant was dismissed from the service. 2. The brief 'facts of the case are that the appellant joined service in Forest Department as Chowkidar on 1-11-1990 on the night intervening 13/14 March, 1994 a Computer and a Printer were stolen from the Office of the Conservator Range Land Division. On the basis of said theft the appellant was charge-sheeted on 26-3-1994 and after the completion of the inquiry the appellant was dealt with as stated above. 3. The respondents have filed their written objections and denied the contents of appeal. 4. A replication on behalf of appellant has also been filed. 5. We have heard the counsel for the parties. 6. It has been frankly conceded by the counsel for appellant that the inquiry conducted against the appellant was in order and appellant could be punished for the misconduct he had committed. The learned counsel, however, pleaded that the penalty of dismissal from service is very harsh against a low-paid Government employee. 7. We have given our anxious thoughts to the plea of counsel for appellant. From the statement made by the appellant before this Tribunal it transpires that on the fateful day the appellant was performing his duties as Chowkidar. It is stated by the appellant that on account of heavy rain and wind the appellant went inside a room to avoid the cold and rain and in the morning he found that the bolt of the door was broken. The appellant was primarily posted as Chowkidar and in this capacity he is expected to remain vigilant and alert in the performance of his duties. In the middle of March there is not much of cold in this region. The appellant tried to make up a story which was not accepted by the Superior Authorities of the Department. The civil servants are lacking in observance of service discipline and further indulgence on the part of this Tribunal in a matter of discipline and proper service conduct may lead to disastrous results. There appears no valid reasons to consider the matter for lesser penalty. The appeal is liable to be dismissed. 8. In view of the above the appeal is dismissed with no order as to costs. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Azad Jammu and Kashmir Service Tribunal Judge(s): Raja Bashir Ahmad Khan, Kh. Abdul Hameed Title: MUHAMMAD ASLAM vs AZAD GOVERNMENT OF THE STATE OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR, MUZAFFARABAD and 4 others Case No.: Service Appeal No, 789 of 1994 Date of Judgment: 1996-11-21 Reported As: 1997 P L C (C.S.) 640 Result: Appeal dismissed Judgment JUDGMENT ' RAJA BASHIR AHMAD KHAN (CHAIRMAN).---This appeal has been filed against order No, 16 for the year 1993-94, dated 8-6-1994 whereby the appellant was dismissed from the service. 2. The brief 'facts of the case are that the appellant joined service in Forest Department as Chowkidar on 1-11-1990 on the night intervening 13/14 March, 1994 a Computer and a Printer were stolen from the Office of the Conservator Range Land Division. On the basis of said theft the appellant was charge-sheeted on 26-3-1994 and after the completion of the inquiry the appellant was dealt with as stated above. 3. The respondents have filed their written objections and denied the contents of appeal. 4. A replication on behalf of appellant has also been filed. 5. We have heard the counsel for the parties. 6. It has been frankly conceded by the counsel for appellant that the inquiry conducted against the appellant was in order and appellant could be punished for the misconduct he had committed. The learned counsel, however, pleaded that the penalty of dismissal from service is very harsh against a low-paid Government employee. 7. We have given our anxious thoughts to the plea of counsel for appellant. From the statement made by the appellant before this Tribunal it transpires that on the fateful day the appellant was performing his duties as Chowkidar. It is stated by the appellant that on account of heavy rain and wind the appellant went inside a room to avoid the cold and rain and in the morning he found that the bolt of the door was broken. The appellant was primarily posted as Chowkidar and in this capacity he is expected to remain vigilant and alert in the performance of his duties. In the middle of March there is not much of cold in this region. The appellant tried to make up a story which was not accepted by the Superior Authorities of the Department. The civil servants are lacking in observance of service discipline and further indulgence on the part of this Tribunal in a matter of discipline and proper service conduct may lead to disastrous results. There appears no valid reasons to consider the matter for lesser penalty. The appeal is liable to be dismissed. 8. In view of the above the appeal is dismissed with no order as to costs. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem