EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark MUHAMMAD FAROOQ vs THE STATE and another Criminal Miscellaneous No,255 of 2007 Petition No,100 of 2006 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: MUHAMMAD FAROOQ Respondant: THE STATE and another Result: Order accordingly Judgment Date: 2007-10-27 Court: Supreme Court of Pakistan Judges: Falak Sher Sardar Muhammad Raza Khan Citations Advocates Statutes 2008 SCMR 265 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER In the instant case the compromise has been effected where father of the deceased has waived his right while the mother has not. With reference to section 338-E read with sections 309, 310 and 311, P.P.C. The mother is entitled to Badl-i-Sulh/compensation. It is to be appreciated that the instant one is not a case of Qisas but that of Ta'zir where the compromise should come from all the legal heirs, The petitioner-convict is directed to deposit a sum of Rs,3,00,000 as Badl-iSulh on or before 22-11-2007 with the Registrar of this Court. Further considerations would be taken after deposit. The case be re-listed on 22-11-2007. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Supreme Court of Pakistan Judge(s): Falak Sher, Sardar Muhammad Raza Khan Title: MUHAMMAD FAROOQ vs THE STATE and another Case No.: Criminal Miscellaneous No,255 of 2007 Petition No,100 of 2006 Date of Judgment: 2007-10-27 Reported As: 2008 SCMR 265 Result: Order accordingly Judgment ORDER In the instant case the compromise has been effected where father of the deceased has waived his right while the mother has not. With reference to section 338-E read with sections 309, 310 and 311, P.P.C. The mother is entitled to Badl-i-Sulh/compensation. It is to be appreciated that the instant one is not a case of Qisas but that of Ta'zir where the compromise should come from all the legal heirs, The petitioner-convict is directed to deposit a sum of Rs,3,00,000 as Badl-iSulh on or before 22-11-2007 with the Registrar of this Court. Further considerations would be taken after deposit. The case be re-listed on 22-11-2007. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-14 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem