EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark MUHAMMAD HASHIM vs PRESIDING OFFICER and 6 others C.P. No. D-894 of 2007 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: MUHAMMAD HASHIM Respondant: PRESIDING OFFICER and 6 others Result: Order accordingly Judgment Date: 2007-09-25 Court: Sindh High Court Judges: Rehmat Hussain Jaffery Author Citations Advocates Statutes 2008 M L D 177 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' REHMAT HUSSAIN JAFFERI, J.---The petition has been filed for the quashment of the proceedings pending before the Special Court (Offences in Banks) Sindh at Karachi arising out of F.I.R. No.1/2001. The learned Advocate for the petitioner has stated that he had moved application under section 249-A, Cr.P.C. But the trial Court has not decided the same and that the trial Court has no jurisdiction to try the offence. ' From the above position, it is clear that the petitioner has already invoked the jurisdiction of the trial Court for acquittal of the petitioner. The point of jurisdiction and the application under section 249-A, Cr.P.C. Are yet to be decided by the trial Court as such adequate remedy is available with the petitioner which he has already availed. In the circumstances, the trial Court is directed to decide the point of jurisdiction and the application under section 249-A, Cr.P.C. Within a period of one month. The petition is disposed of in the above terms. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Sindh High Court Judge(s): Rehmat Hussain Jaffery Title: MUHAMMAD HASHIM vs PRESIDING OFFICER and 6 others Case No.: C.P. No. D-894 of 2007 Date of Judgment: 2007-09-25 Reported As: 2008 M L D 177 Result: Order accordingly Judgment ORDER ' REHMAT HUSSAIN JAFFERI, J.---The petition has been filed for the quashment of the proceedings pending before the Special Court (Offences in Banks) Sindh at Karachi arising out of F.I.R. No.1/2001. The learned Advocate for the petitioner has stated that he had moved application under section 249-A, Cr.P.C. But the trial Court has not decided the same and that the trial Court has no jurisdiction to try the offence. ' From the above position, it is clear that the petitioner has already invoked the jurisdiction of the trial Court for acquittal of the petitioner. The point of jurisdiction and the application under section 249-A, Cr.P.C. Are yet to be decided by the trial Court as such adequate remedy is available with the petitioner which he has already availed. In the circumstances, the trial Court is directed to decide the point of jurisdiction and the application under section 249-A, Cr.P.C. Within a period of one month. The petition is disposed of in the above terms. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-14 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem