EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark MUHAMMAD RAMZAN SHAHID vs IKRAM ULLAH SALEEMI, ADVOCATE File No,3 of 1996 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 3 Appeallant: MUHAMMAD RAMZAN SHAHID Respondant: IKRAM ULLAH SALEEMI, ADVOCATE Result: Order accordingly Judgment Date: 1999-04-10 Court: Bar Council Tribunal Judges: Tassaduq Hussain Jilani Mian Muhammad Ameen Kalanauri Rana Ikram Ullah Khan Citations Advocates Statutes 2000 C L C 1959 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' The charge against the respondent-Advocate is that in a suit for recovery of rent amounting to Rs,57,600, he made a conceding statement on 9-2-1995 to the effect that complainant did not want to pursue the matter in terms of which, the suit was dismissed as withdrawn on 9-2-1995. The stand of the respondent-Advocate is that the complainant had filed a suit for recovery of the afore-referred money and an application for execution of the judgment and decree in an ejectment matter. The latter application was disposed of in terms of compromise, dated 19-1-1995 through a written application and in the said application of compromise which was marked by the Court as Exh.C-1, it was stipulated as under:-- (i) That the judgment-debtor Ghayas-ud-Din Butt, shall pay the arrears amounting to Rs,1,12,000. The payment was to be made through judgment-debtor's brother namely, Abdul Hafeez Butt, Advocate. (ii) Out of the afore-referrred amount, Rs,60,000 was paid in Court. (iii) That the future rent of the shop would be Rs,4,000. (iv) That Mr. Abdul Hafeez Butt, Advocate shall be bound to make the remaining payment of Rs,52,000 2. Respondent-Advocate admits that since the parties had compromised, in gore-referred terms, he had instructions to make conceding statement to the effect that complainant/plaintiff did not want to pursue the case. 3. We have gone through the order, dated 19-1-1995 and 19-2-1995. After the compromise between the parties on 19-1-1995, respondent-Advocate made the following statement on 9-2-1995:-- 4. It is conceded by the complainant that Rs,57,600 which was subject-matter of the suit in which the afore-referred statement was made was the same amount which was reduced to Rs,52,000 in terms of the compromise arrived at between the parties on 19-1-1995. That being so, we are of the view that respondent-Advocate did not commit any professional misconduct and this complaint is misconceived. However, we note that Mr. Abdul Hafeez Butt, Advocate, real brother of the judgment-debtor is responsible to make the payment of the amount in terms of the compromise arrived at between the parties on 19-1-1995. The said Advocate is also present before this Tribunal pursuant to this Tribunal's order. He concedes that the judgment-debtor Ghayas-ud-Din Butt, his real brother is bound to make the payment and he will make efforts for the same. The complaint stands disposed of in terms noted above. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Bar Council Tribunal Judge(s): Tassaduq Hussain Jilani, Mian Muhammad Ameen Kalanauri, Rana Ikram Ullah Khan Title: MUHAMMAD RAMZAN SHAHID vs IKRAM ULLAH SALEEMI, ADVOCATE Case No.: File No,3 of 1996 Date of Judgment: 1999-04-10 Reported As: 2000 C L C 1959 Result: Order accordingly Judgment ORDER ' The charge against the respondent-Advocate is that in a suit for recovery of rent amounting to Rs,57,600, he made a conceding statement on 9-2-1995 to the effect that complainant did not want to pursue the matter in terms of which, the suit was dismissed as withdrawn on 9-2-1995. The stand of the respondent-Advocate is that the complainant had filed a suit for recovery of the afore-referred money and an application for execution of the judgment and decree in an ejectment matter. The latter application was disposed of in terms of compromise, dated 19-1-1995 through a written application and in the said application of compromise which was marked by the Court as Exh.C-1, it was stipulated as under:-- (i) That the judgment-debtor Ghayas-ud-Din Butt, shall pay the arrears amounting to Rs,1,12,000. The payment was to be made through judgment-debtor's brother namely, Abdul Hafeez Butt, Advocate. (ii) Out of the afore-referrred amount, Rs,60,000 was paid in Court. (iii) That the future rent of the shop would be Rs,4,000. (iv) That Mr. Abdul Hafeez Butt, Advocate shall be bound to make the remaining payment of Rs,52,000 2. Respondent-Advocate admits that since the parties had compromised, in gore-referred terms, he had instructions to make conceding statement to the effect that complainant/plaintiff did not want to pursue the case. 3. We have gone through the order, dated 19-1-1995 and 19-2-1995. After the compromise between the parties on 19-1-1995, respondent-Advocate made the following statement on 9-2-1995:-- 4. It is conceded by the complainant that Rs,57,600 which was subject-matter of the suit in which the afore-referred statement was made was the same amount which was reduced to Rs,52,000 in terms of the compromise arrived at between the parties on 19-1-1995. That being so, we are of the view that respondent-Advocate did not commit any professional misconduct and this complaint is misconceived. However, we note that Mr. Abdul Hafeez Butt, Advocate, real brother of the judgment-debtor is responsible to make the payment of the amount in terms of the compromise arrived at between the parties on 19-1-1995. The said Advocate is also present before this Tribunal pursuant to this Tribunal's order. He concedes that the judgment-debtor Ghayas-ud-Din Butt, his real brother is bound to make the payment and he will make efforts for the same. The complaint stands disposed of in terms noted above. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem