EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark MUHAMMAD JUMAN vs SHOUKAT HUSSAIN Case No, S. R. O. R. 221 of 1982-83 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: MUHAMMAD JUMAN Respondant: SHOUKAT HUSSAIN Result: Petition rejected Judgment Date: 1983-10-01 Court: Board of Revenue Judges: Ali Muhammad G. Shaikh Citations Advocates Statutes P L D 1984 Rev. 6 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER This is a revision petition filed against the orders of Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad Division, dated 3-11-82, rejecting the appeal of the petitioner being badly time-barred. The petitioner as well as respondent were present alongwith their Advocates. Main contentions of the Advocate for petitioner are that the respondent was student at the time of Katchery and he managed to get the land from the Barrage Department on the basis of hare ship. He has produced photostat copy of certificate of the respondent from Sind University. He, therefore, contended that the respondent was not eligible for grant of land being student. In support of his contention he has referred to Revenue Ruling pages 12 and 13. The Advocate further contended that the respondent alongwith his two brothers got 3 lots of the land. Besides that his father is also Zamindar by profession, therefore, he is not eligible for the grant of land. In support of his contention he has referred to para. 6 of the Land Grant Policy and Revenue Ruling, pages 90-91. He contended that the petitioner is resident of Deb and his father is cultivating adjoining S. Nos. He has produced Khasra Girdawari of the father of the petitioner. The Advocate for respondent argued that under para. 6 of Land Grant Policy, a minor is not eligible for grant of land. The respondent does not fall in that category as he is major and living separate from his father. He has produced Identity Card and copy of the electoral list and Khasra Girdawari showing that the respondent is 25 years of age and is hari by profession. The Advocate contended that the respondent appeared privately in the examination and there is no bar on the private student to cultivate the land and continue his studies. He further stated that at the time of grant of land, the respondent had completed the education. I have heard the Advocates for both the parties and perused the relevant record. From the perusal of certificate of Sind University, it appears that the respondent was student of B. A. In 1980-81. The land was granted to him after he took B. A. Examination. There is no bar in granting the land to the private Arts student as education is not his full time job. AS A regards granting 3 lots to the same family, it is proved that respondent is aged 25 years living separate from his father, therefore, eligible for grant of land as separate family member. The respondent was granted the land in open Katchery, where the petitioner did not contest, therefore, he should not have cause of action at this stage. In view of the above facts, I do not see any reason to interfere with the order of Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad Division. The revision petition merits no consideration and is rejected. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue Judge(s): Ali Muhammad G. Shaikh Title: MUHAMMAD JUMAN vs SHOUKAT HUSSAIN Case No.: Case No, S. R. O. R. 221 of 1982-83 Date of Judgment: 1983-10-01 Reported As: P L D 1984 Rev. 6 Result: Petition rejected Judgment ORDER This is a revision petition filed against the orders of Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad Division, dated 3-11-82, rejecting the appeal of the petitioner being badly time-barred. The petitioner as well as respondent were present alongwith their Advocates. Main contentions of the Advocate for petitioner are that the respondent was student at the time of Katchery and he managed to get the land from the Barrage Department on the basis of hare ship. He has produced photostat copy of certificate of the respondent from Sind University. He, therefore, contended that the respondent was not eligible for grant of land being student. In support of his contention he has referred to Revenue Ruling pages 12 and 13. The Advocate further contended that the respondent alongwith his two brothers got 3 lots of the land. Besides that his father is also Zamindar by profession, therefore, he is not eligible for the grant of land. In support of his contention he has referred to para. 6 of the Land Grant Policy and Revenue Ruling, pages 90-91. He contended that the petitioner is resident of Deb and his father is cultivating adjoining S. Nos. He has produced Khasra Girdawari of the father of the petitioner. The Advocate for respondent argued that under para. 6 of Land Grant Policy, a minor is not eligible for grant of land. The respondent does not fall in that category as he is major and living separate from his father. He has produced Identity Card and copy of the electoral list and Khasra Girdawari showing that the respondent is 25 years of age and is hari by profession. The Advocate contended that the respondent appeared privately in the examination and there is no bar on the private student to cultivate the land and continue his studies. He further stated that at the time of grant of land, the respondent had completed the education. I have heard the Advocates for both the parties and perused the relevant record. From the perusal of certificate of Sind University, it appears that the respondent was student of B. A. In 1980-81. The land was granted to him after he took B. A. Examination. There is no bar in granting the land to the private Arts student as education is not his full time job. AS A regards granting 3 lots to the same family, it is proved that respondent is aged 25 years living separate from his father, therefore, eligible for grant of land as separate family member. The respondent was granted the land in open Katchery, where the petitioner did not contest, therefore, he should not have cause of action at this stage. In view of the above facts, I do not see any reason to interfere with the order of Additional Commissioner, Hyderabad Division. The revision petition merits no consideration and is rejected. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem