EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark MUHAMMAD AND OTHERS vs THB STATE Criminal Revision No, 936 of 1969 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: MUHAMMAD AND OTHERS Respondant: THB STATE Result: Petition accepted Judgment Date: 1976-03-09 Court: Baghdad-ul-Jadid Judges: Ch. Muhammad Siddique Citations Advocates Statutes 1976 P Cr. L J 1037 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT ' As a result of occurrence having taken place on 25-5-1965, the police challenged the present petitioners under section 302/.07, 148/49, P. P. C. The commitment proceedings were conducted by the Magistrate lit Class, Minchinabad, District Bahawalnagar who vide order dated 31-10-1967, discharged the accused persons under section 209, Cr. C. P. By observing as under :- "The perusal of the prosecution evidence leaves no doubt in my mind that there are no reasonable grounds found in prosecution evidence to form a prima facie case against the accused and no Court can reasonably convict them. It will be a sheer waste of time of the Court of Session and of unnecessary expenditure upon the State. I have no alternative but to discharge the accused as no case has been established against them for committing them for trial to the Court of Session. 1, therefore, discharge them under section 209, Cr. P. C. As all the accused are already on bail from the Court of Session, they are discharged from the bail bonds. The gun P. 7 and licence 2 xh. P. L./I. Be restored to Shames Din accused when the period for revision is over." 2. Fateh Muhammad, father of Muhammad Tufail deceased, filed a revision petition before the Additional Sessions Judge, Bahawalnagar. At the relevant time Syed Sajjad Ali shah was working as Additional Sessions Judge at Bahawalnagar. He entertained this revision petition which remained pending before him for some time. On 16-4-1969 arguments of the parties were concluded and the case was adjourned to 23-4-1969 for order. On 23-4-69 the presiding officer remained busy with other work and therefore could not dictate the judgment and adjourned this case to 25-4-1969. On 24-4-1964 the parties filed their written arguments and the case was again adjourned to 28-5-1969 for perusal of written arguments and for pronouncement of order. Meanwhile Syed Sajjad Ali Shah the presiding officer was transferred to Rahimyar Khan and he handed over the charge at Bahawalnagar on 25-4-1969. He was succeeded by Ch. Muhammad Sharif who took charge of this Division on 26-4-1969. On 28-5-1969 he passed the following order requesting his predecessor Mr. Sajjad Ali Shah, Sessions Judge Rahimyar Khan to write the judgment and to send the same to him for its pronouncement:- "I have perused the earlier orders of my learned predecessor. He was pleased to hear arguments of the learned A. P. P. On 16-4-1969. According to his direction the parties filed the written arguments on the same date. The petition was adjourned for the pronouncement of order on 23-4-1969. On the same date the petition was procrastinated due to some other engagements of my learned predecessor, He could not find time to dictate the judgment. This petition was again adjourned to 28-5-69 for the perusal of the written arguments and the pronouncement of order. It is not a petition in respect of the rehearing of arguments on some point or the other because my learned predecessor had obtained written arguments from the parties which are on the file. If I pronounce judgment in this petition, I shall be transgressing my lawful limits, and it shall also be in violation of the High Court Rules & Orders. The file may be despatched to Syeu Sajjad Ali Shah, my learned predecessor, who is now Sessions Judge, Rahimyarkhan. He may be requested to write a judgment and send it to me for its pronouncement as early as convenient." ' Accordingly Mr. Sajjad Ali Shah Sessions Judge, Rahimyarkhan wrote the impugned judgment dated 3-7-1969 at Rahimyarkhan by which he set aside the order of discharge dated 31-10-1957 passed by the Inquiry Magistrate and ordered that the accused be arrested and committed for trial on charges framed by him separately. The trial was ordered to proceed in the Court of Session at Bahawalnagar on the dates to be fixed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Bahawalnagar. The learned Sessions Judge, Rabirnyerithan vice D. 0. No, D69 dated 5-7-1969 sent this judgment dated 3-7-1969 along with the charge-sheet and the record of the revision petition, to the Additional Sessions Judge, Bahawalnagar. Against this impugned judgment dated 3-7-1969 the present revision petition was filed before this Court which was admitted to regular hearing on e-11-69 and further proceedings before the lower Court were stayed. Mr. Asghar Ali Bhatsi, learned counsel for the petitioners, points out that during the pendency of the present petition, one of the petitioners, namely Haji Muhammad has died. To the extent of this accused-petitioner the case therefore stands abated. 3. The main points which fall fof determination in this case are:- (a) Whether the Sessions Judge of one :,essions Division. Is competent to transfer a case from his division to the Court of Sessions Judge of another Division, and (b) Whether a Sessions Judge would have jurisdiction to hear a case relating to another Sessions Division after his transfer from that Division. ' As mentioned above, Syed Sajjad All Shah while posted at Bahawalnagar as Additional Sessions Judge had heart the arguments in the revision petition, but before he could dictate and pronounce the judgment, he was transferred to Rahimyarkhan as Sessions Judge. He was succeeded by Ch. Muhammad Sharif at Bahawalnagar. Mr. Muhammad Sharif sent the file of this case to his predecessor Mr. Sajjad Ali Snah at Rahimyarkhan to write the judgment and sent the same to him for its pronouncement. In this background the question which arises for consideration is whether Ch. Muhammad Sharif as Additional Sessions Judge, Babawalnagar, was competent to transfer the present case to his predecessor Mr. Saijad Ali Shah at Rahiiriyarkhan. Mr. Muhammad Aslam; the learned State counsel, has not been able to point out any provision of law under which a Sessions Judge of one Division can transfer a case from his Division to another Division. On the other hand, I find that under the law it is the I sigh Court alone which is competent to transfer a case from one Sessions Division to another Sessions Division. In the absence of any provision of law, authorising one Sessions Judge, transferring the case from the Division to another Sessions Division, the order of Mr. Muhammad Sharif, Additional Sessions Judge, Bahawalnagar, transferring the instant case to the Sessions Judge, Rahimyarkhan is clearly without lawful authority. In had no power whatever to do so. 4. As regards the jurisdiction of Mr. Seabed All Shah, Sessions Judge, Rahimyarkhan, after his transfer from Bahawalnagar and handing over the charge on 26-4-1969 to his successor there, he ceased to be Additional Sessions Judge of that Division and therefore, had become functus officio While functioning as Sessions Judge, Raniniyarkhan, he had no territorial B jurisdiction to hear or dispose of any case relating to any Other Sessions Division, Admittedly, the instant case related to Bahawalnagar Sessions Division and consequently the Sessions Judge, Rahimyarkhan, would have no jurisdiction, to decide this case. The mere fact that he had earlier heard the arguments of the parties at Bahawalnagar, would not coder any jurisdiction upon him after his transfer from there. Similarly, the fact that the file of this case was sent by his successor Mr. Muhammad Sharif from Bahawalnagar, would not confer any jurisdiction upon him at Rahimyarkhan. The proper course for Mr. Muhammad Sharif, Additional Sessions Judge, Bahawalnagar was to refer the case to c the High Court, Lahore which in turn should have asked the Province Government to issue the requisite notification under Section 9 the Criminal Procedure Code authorising Mr. Sajjad Ali Shah, Sessions Judge, Rahimyarkhan to dispose of the present case at Bahawalnagar. The Sessions Judge, Rahimyarkhan could also be appointed by the Provincial Government as Additional Sessions Judge, Bahawalnagar to exercise jurisdiction there. It is an admitted fact that none of these things was done in this case. Considered from any angle, it is quite clear that Mr. Sajjad Ail Shah while functioning as Sessions Judge Rahimyarkhan had no jurisdiction whatever to decide the instant case which related to Bahawalnagar Session Division. In this view of the matter, the impugned judgment is clearly without jurisdiction and, therefore, liable to he set aside. Accordingly, while accepting this revision petition, I quash the impugned judgment and remit the case to the Sessions Judge, Bahawalnagar. Who should dispose of the revision petition filed by Patch Muhammad afresh in accordance with law after hearing the parties. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Baghdad-ul-Jadid Judge(s): Ch. Muhammad Siddique Title: MUHAMMAD AND OTHERS vs THB STATE Case No.: Criminal Revision No, 936 of 1969 Date of Judgment: 1976-03-09 Reported As: 1976 P Cr. L J 1037 Result: Petition accepted Judgment JUDGMENT ' As a result of occurrence having taken place on 25-5-1965, the police challenged the present petitioners under section 302/.07, 148/49, P. P. C. The commitment proceedings were conducted by the Magistrate lit Class, Minchinabad, District Bahawalnagar who vide order dated 31-10-1967, discharged the accused persons under section 209, Cr. C. P. By observing as under :- "The perusal of the prosecution evidence leaves no doubt in my mind that there are no reasonable grounds found in prosecution evidence to form a prima facie case against the accused and no Court can reasonably convict them. It will be a sheer waste of time of the Court of Session and of unnecessary expenditure upon the State. I have no alternative but to discharge the accused as no case has been established against them for committing them for trial to the Court of Session. 1, therefore, discharge them under section 209, Cr. P. C. As all the accused are already on bail from the Court of Session, they are discharged from the bail bonds. The gun P. 7 and licence 2 xh. P. L./I. Be restored to Shames Din accused when the period for revision is over." 2. Fateh Muhammad, father of Muhammad Tufail deceased, filed a revision petition before the Additional Sessions Judge, Bahawalnagar. At the relevant time Syed Sajjad Ali shah was working as Additional Sessions Judge at Bahawalnagar. He entertained this revision petition which remained pending before him for some time. On 16-4-1969 arguments of the parties were concluded and the case was adjourned to 23-4-1969 for order. On 23-4-69 the presiding officer remained busy with other work and therefore could not dictate the judgment and adjourned this case to 25-4-1969. On 24-4-1964 the parties filed their written arguments and the case was again adjourned to 28-5-1969 for perusal of written arguments and for pronouncement of order. Meanwhile Syed Sajjad Ali Shah the presiding officer was transferred to Rahimyar Khan and he handed over the charge at Bahawalnagar on 25-4-1969. He was succeeded by Ch. Muhammad Sharif who took charge of this Division on 26-4-1969. On 28-5-1969 he passed the following order requesting his predecessor Mr. Sajjad Ali Shah, Sessions Judge Rahimyar Khan to write the judgment and to send the same to him for its pronouncement:- "I have perused the earlier orders of my learned predecessor. He was pleased to hear arguments of the learned A. P. P. On 16-4-1969. According to his direction the parties filed the written arguments on the same date. The petition was adjourned for the pronouncement of order on 23-4-1969. On the same date the petition was procrastinated due to some other engagements of my learned predecessor, He could not find time to dictate the judgment. This petition was again adjourned to 28-5-69 for the perusal of the written arguments and the pronouncement of order. It is not a petition in respect of the rehearing of arguments on some point or the other because my learned predecessor had obtained written arguments from the parties which are on the file. If I pronounce judgment in this petition, I shall be transgressing my lawful limits, and it shall also be in violation of the High Court Rules & Orders. The file may be despatched to Syeu Sajjad Ali Shah, my learned predecessor, who is now Sessions Judge, Rahimyarkhan. He may be requested to write a judgment and send it to me for its pronouncement as early as convenient." ' Accordingly Mr. Sajjad Ali Shah Sessions Judge, Rahimyarkhan wrote the impugned judgment dated 3-7-1969 at Rahimyarkhan by which he set aside the order of discharge dated 31-10-1957 passed by the Inquiry Magistrate and ordered that the accused be arrested and committed for trial on charges framed by him separately. The trial was ordered to proceed in the Court of Session at Bahawalnagar on the dates to be fixed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Bahawalnagar. The learned Sessions Judge, Rabirnyerithan vice D. 0. No, D69 dated 5-7-1969 sent this judgment dated 3-7-1969 along with the charge-sheet and the record of the revision petition, to the Additional Sessions Judge, Bahawalnagar. Against this impugned judgment dated 3-7-1969 the present revision petition was filed before this Court which was admitted to regular hearing on e-11-69 and further proceedings before the lower Court were stayed. Mr. Asghar Ali Bhatsi, learned counsel for the petitioners, points out that during the pendency of the present petition, one of the petitioners, namely Haji Muhammad has died. To the extent of this accused-petitioner the case therefore stands abated. 3. The main points which fall fof determination in this case are:- (a) Whether the Sessions Judge of one :,essions Division. Is competent to transfer a case from his division to the Court of Sessions Judge of another Division, and (b) Whether a Sessions Judge would have jurisdiction to hear a case relating to another Sessions Division after his transfer from that Division. ' As mentioned above, Syed Sajjad All Shah while posted at Bahawalnagar as Additional Sessions Judge had heart the arguments in the revision petition, but before he could dictate and pronounce the judgment, he was transferred to Rahimyarkhan as Sessions Judge. He was succeeded by Ch. Muhammad Sharif at Bahawalnagar. Mr. Muhammad Sharif sent the file of this case to his predecessor Mr. Sajjad Ali Snah at Rahimyarkhan to write the judgment and sent the same to him for its pronouncement. In this background the question which arises for consideration is whether Ch. Muhammad Sharif as Additional Sessions Judge, Babawalnagar, was competent to transfer the present case to his predecessor Mr. Saijad Ali Shah at Rahiiriyarkhan. Mr. Muhammad Aslam; the learned State counsel, has not been able to point out any provision of law under which a Sessions Judge of one Division can transfer a case from his Division to another Division. On the other hand, I find that under the law it is the I sigh Court alone which is competent to transfer a case from one Sessions Division to another Sessions Division. In the absence of any provision of law, authorising one Sessions Judge, transferring the case from the Division to another Sessions Division, the order of Mr. Muhammad Sharif, Additional Sessions Judge, Bahawalnagar, transferring the instant case to the Sessions Judge, Rahimyarkhan is clearly without lawful authority. In had no power whatever to do so. 4. As regards the jurisdiction of Mr. Seabed All Shah, Sessions Judge, Rahimyarkhan, after his transfer from Bahawalnagar and handing over the charge on 26-4-1969 to his successor there, he ceased to be Additional Sessions Judge of that Division and therefore, had become functus officio While functioning as Sessions Judge, Raniniyarkhan, he had no territorial B jurisdiction to hear or dispose of any case relating to any Other Sessions Division, Admittedly, the instant case related to Bahawalnagar Sessions Division and consequently the Sessions Judge, Rahimyarkhan, would have no jurisdiction, to decide this case. The mere fact that he had earlier heard the arguments of the parties at Bahawalnagar, would not coder any jurisdiction upon him after his transfer from there. Similarly, the fact that the file of this case was sent by his successor Mr. Muhammad Sharif from Bahawalnagar, would not confer any jurisdiction upon him at Rahimyarkhan. The proper course for Mr. Muhammad Sharif, Additional Sessions Judge, Bahawalnagar was to refer the case to c the High Court, Lahore which in turn should have asked the Province Government to issue the requisite notification under Section 9 the Criminal Procedure Code authorising Mr. Sajjad Ali Shah, Sessions Judge, Rahimyarkhan to dispose of the present case at Bahawalnagar. The Sessions Judge, Rahimyarkhan could also be appointed by the Provincial Government as Additional Sessions Judge, Bahawalnagar to exercise jurisdiction there. It is an admitted fact that none of these things was done in this case. Considered from any angle, it is quite clear that Mr. Sajjad Ail Shah while functioning as Sessions Judge Rahimyarkhan had no jurisdiction whatever to decide the instant case which related to Bahawalnagar Session Division. In this view of the matter, the impugned judgment is clearly without jurisdiction and, therefore, liable to he set aside. Accordingly, while accepting this revision petition, I quash the impugned judgment and remit the case to the Sessions Judge, Bahawalnagar. Who should dispose of the revision petition filed by Patch Muhammad afresh in accordance with law after hearing the parties. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem