EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark MUHAMMAD AFZAL SHAH vs ASMAT KAMAL KHAN, ADVOCATE File No,57 of 1995 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: MUHAMMAD AFZAL SHAH Respondant: ASMAT KAMAL KHAN, ADVOCATE Result: Order accordingly Judgment Date: 1999-04-17 Court: Bar Council Tribunal Judges: Muhammad Ramzan Chaudhry Tassaduq Hussain Jilani Citations Advocates Statutes 2000 C L C 1999 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' The allegation against the respondent-Advocate was that he was engaged by the complainant to challenge the order passed by the Punjab Labour Court No, VII, Lahore whereby he was refused allowances amounting to Rs,18,125 but the respondent-Advocate despite having given undertaking did not file any petition. It was further alleged that on account of pursuing this matter and frequently coming to Lahore, the complainant had not only to incure expense but mental torture as well. 2. The respondent-Advocate denies the afore-referred allegations but very fairly concedes that he did accept Rs,500 as initial expense but advised the complainant not to challenge the order as no case was made out. The respondent-Adovcate on a query made by this Tribunal voluntarily offered to A compensate the complainant in terms of which he gave Rs,10,000 which have been readily accepted 'by the complainant. Since the matter has been settled mutually and there is no corroborating evidence in support of either of the parties and as admittedly, there is no other complaint against the respondent-Advocate, we are not inclined to pass any order in this complaint which stands disposed of. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Bar Council Tribunal Judge(s): Muhammad Ramzan Chaudhry, Tassaduq Hussain Jilani Title: MUHAMMAD AFZAL SHAH vs ASMAT KAMAL KHAN, ADVOCATE Case No.: File No,57 of 1995 Date of Judgment: 1999-04-17 Reported As: 2000 C L C 1999 Result: Order accordingly Judgment ORDER ' The allegation against the respondent-Advocate was that he was engaged by the complainant to challenge the order passed by the Punjab Labour Court No, VII, Lahore whereby he was refused allowances amounting to Rs,18,125 but the respondent-Advocate despite having given undertaking did not file any petition. It was further alleged that on account of pursuing this matter and frequently coming to Lahore, the complainant had not only to incure expense but mental torture as well. 2. The respondent-Advocate denies the afore-referred allegations but very fairly concedes that he did accept Rs,500 as initial expense but advised the complainant not to challenge the order as no case was made out. The respondent-Adovcate on a query made by this Tribunal voluntarily offered to A compensate the complainant in terms of which he gave Rs,10,000 which have been readily accepted 'by the complainant. Since the matter has been settled mutually and there is no corroborating evidence in support of either of the parties and as admittedly, there is no other complaint against the respondent-Advocate, we are not inclined to pass any order in this complaint which stands disposed of. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem