EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark Muhammad Ameen vs Deputy Commissioner Panjgur C.P. No. (T) 117 of 2022 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 4 Coram 2 Appeallant: Muhammad Ameen Respondant: Deputy Commissioner Panjgur Result: Petition dismissed Judgment Date: 2022-11-30 Court: Balochistan High Court Judges: Rozi Khan Barrech Author Abdul Hameed Baloch Citations Advocates Statutes 2023 MLD 910 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT ROZI KHAN BARRECH, J. Through the instant constitution petition filed under Article 199 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of ' Pakistan, 1973, the following relief has been sought by the petitioner: "In view of the above it is accordingly respectfully prayed to direct the respondent to decide the application of the petitioner and also directed the respondent ‘to give the compensation to-the extent of land coming in the road cutting. Any better relief in the circumstances may also be awarded in the interest of Justice." 2. The case of the petitioner, as set up in the instant petition, is that the main road of the District Panjgoor is under construction, and the land of the petitioner is also coming in the road cutting. The respondent called the petitioner for compensation, and gave compensation to the petitioner to the extent of date trees coming in the road cutting. It has been averred in the petition that the petitioner approached the respondent for compensation to the extent of land approximately 700 sq. ft. by length and 18 sq. ft. by width, and the petitioner filed an application before the respondent, but the respondent lingered on the matter on one and other pretext and not deciding the application of the petitioner nor given any compensation to the extent of land coming in the road cutting. Hence, this petition. Despite repeated calls, counsel for the petitioner was not in attendance. In such circumstances, we are left with no other option except to decide the matter on the basis of material available on record after hearing learned AAG. 3. Learned AAG, while arguing the matter, stated that, factually the property belongs to the Government of Balochistan and the petitioner has no title document in respect of the property in question. This petition was filed on 25.05.2022, and it was listed for katcha peshi on 08.6.2022, of which date the order sheet reads as under: "When confronted with maintainability of the instant constitution petition in absence of any title documents and payment of alleged compensation for date trees, learned counsel for the petitioner requested for an opportunity to apply for the relevant documents and to place the same before this court. Opportunity is afforded. As per request of learned counsel for the petitioner, office to fix the matter after one week." 4. On the next date of hearing, i.e. 21.06.2022, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted an application in office for placing on record certain relevant documents. After perusal of the said document, it was the judgment of the Qazi court dated 26.05,2009 in respect of property situated at the area of Gitani Washbood, Tehsil Panjgoor. 5. The said suit was between one Dil Murad and Muhammad Ameen and others, which cannot establish the title of the petitioner in property in question. However, the petitioner did not produce any title documents in respect of property in question. 6. The pivotal question which needs determination would be whether the land in question was resumed illegally, unauthorisedly and without any compensation to its lawful owners or otherwise. An in-depth scrutiny of the record would reveal that, admittedly, the petitioner has not attached any title document with the petition and also failed to attend to the specific query of the court, as noted in the order dated 08.06.2020. 7. It appears from the contents of the petition that the dispute in between the parties relates to the disputed title over the subject property, which requires proper adjudication by the relevant forum and the Court of appropriate Civil after recording evidence. 8. It is incumbent upon the petitioner exhausting remedy under Article 199 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, to establish that he has legal right over the subject property and that such right is so clear that its leaves no room of doubt or any controversy, and, the matter involving the disputed and unclear title over the subject property cannot be entertained and allowed to be agitated in writ jurisdiction, for, the exercise of extra ordinary Constitutional Jurisdiction under Article 199 ibid is intended primarily for providing an expeditious remedy in a case where the illegality of the impugned action of an executive or other authority is floating on the surface, which can be established without any elaborate enquiry into the questions involved in the matter. Manifestly, in the matter in band, the petitioner has no clear or undisputed title over the subject land, which is Government land, for, the petitioner claims himself to be the owner of the subject Government land, but he has miserably failed to substantiate his claim of the subject Government land to him; and, thus, this petition is not maintainable. Reliance is Placed on the case of Dr. Sher Afgan Khan Niazi v. Ali S. Habib and others ( 2011 SCMR 1813 ) , wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan has held that:- "10. Besides that what has been discussed herein above there are certain disputed questions of facts which cannot be investigated while exercising Constitutional jurisdiction." It is incumbent upon party seeking constitutional remedy to show that such party has a clear legal right and that such right is so clear as not to admit of a reasonable doubt or controversy... High Court will not go into disputed questions of fact in Constitutional jurisdiction... In Constitutional jurisdiction Court does not go into a question involving lying minute details nor can it decide facts of which no found ion is laid, unless it is shown that such controversy is devoid of supporting record, or perverse."( M.H. Abidi v. Scare Life Insurance Corporation 1990 MLD 563 and Muhammad Nazim v. Rehana Parveen Begum 1990 MLD 344 ). 9. ….In the case of N.W.F.P. Public Service Commission and others v. Muhammad Arif and others ( 2011 SCMR 848 ), wherein, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of. Pakistan has held that:— “9. ...It is well settled by now that "the right which is the foundation of an application under Article 199 is a personal and individual right. The legal right may be a statutory right or a right recognized by the law. A person can be said to be aggrieved only when a person is denied a legal right by someone who has a legal duty to perform relating to the right. There must not only be a right but a justiciable right in existence, to give jurisdiction to the High Court in the matter. Unless whatever right, personal or otherwise, on which the application is based is established, no order can issue under Art. 199." ( Muntizma Committee v. Director K.A. PLD 1992 Kar. 54, Mahmoona v. Ilam Din PLD 1984 Lah. 223, A.F. Farms and Industries v. Development Commr. AIR 1953 Assam 155, Mahboob Khan v. Deputy Commissioner AIR 1953 Assam 145 and Dineshcharan v. State of MB AIR 1953 Madh-B 165)." In view of the above discussion, we are of the opinion that since the title to the land itself is in question. Hence, the same can hardly be adjudicated in writ jurisdiction. Consequently, at the most, we would direct the petitioner to approach the concerned authority for ventilating his grievance and thereafter, if he may be not satisfied, he may resort to a Civil Court for his remedy. The petition is hereby dismissed. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Balochistan High Court Judge(s): Rozi Khan Barrech, Abdul Hameed Baloch Title: Muhammad Ameen vs Deputy Commissioner Panjgur Case No.: C.P. No. (T) 117 of 2022 Date of Judgment: 2022-11-30 Reported As: 2023 MLD 910 Result: Petition dismissed Judgment JUDGMENT ROZI KHAN BARRECH, J. Through the instant constitution petition filed under Article 199 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of ' Pakistan, 1973, the following relief has been sought by the petitioner: "In view of the above it is accordingly respectfully prayed to direct the respondent to decide the application of the petitioner and also directed the respondent ‘to give the compensation to-the extent of land coming in the road cutting. Any better relief in the circumstances may also be awarded in the interest of Justice." 2. The case of the petitioner, as set up in the instant petition, is that the main road of the District Panjgoor is under construction, and the land of the petitioner is also coming in the road cutting. The respondent called the petitioner for compensation, and gave compensation to the petitioner to the extent of date trees coming in the road cutting. It has been averred in the petition that the petitioner approached the respondent for compensation to the extent of land approximately 700 sq. ft. by length and 18 sq. ft. by width, and the petitioner filed an application before the respondent, but the respondent lingered on the matter on one and other pretext and not deciding the application of the petitioner nor given any compensation to the extent of land coming in the road cutting. Hence, this petition. Despite repeated calls, counsel for the petitioner was not in attendance. In such circumstances, we are left with no other option except to decide the matter on the basis of material available on record after hearing learned AAG. 3. Learned AAG, while arguing the matter, stated that, factually the property belongs to the Government of Balochistan and the petitioner has no title document in respect of the property in question. This petition was filed on 25.05.2022, and it was listed for katcha peshi on 08.6.2022, of which date the order sheet reads as under: "When confronted with maintainability of the instant constitution petition in absence of any title documents and payment of alleged compensation for date trees, learned counsel for the petitioner requested for an opportunity to apply for the relevant documents and to place the same before this court. Opportunity is afforded. As per request of learned counsel for the petitioner, office to fix the matter after one week." 4. On the next date of hearing, i.e. 21.06.2022, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted an application in office for placing on record certain relevant documents. After perusal of the said document, it was the judgment of the Qazi court dated 26.05,2009 in respect of property situated at the area of Gitani Washbood, Tehsil Panjgoor. 5. The said suit was between one Dil Murad and Muhammad Ameen and others, which cannot establish the title of the petitioner in property in question. However, the petitioner did not produce any title documents in respect of property in question. 6. The pivotal question which needs determination would be whether the land in question was resumed illegally, unauthorisedly and without any compensation to its lawful owners or otherwise. An in-depth scrutiny of the record would reveal that, admittedly, the petitioner has not attached any title document with the petition and also failed to attend to the specific query of the court, as noted in the order dated 08.06.2020. 7. It appears from the contents of the petition that the dispute in between the parties relates to the disputed title over the subject property, which requires proper adjudication by the relevant forum and the Court of appropriate Civil after recording evidence. 8. It is incumbent upon the petitioner exhausting remedy under Article 199 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, to establish that he has legal right over the subject property and that such right is so clear that its leaves no room of doubt or any controversy, and, the matter involving the disputed and unclear title over the subject property cannot be entertained and allowed to be agitated in writ jurisdiction, for, the exercise of extra ordinary Constitutional Jurisdiction under Article 199 ibid is intended primarily for providing an expeditious remedy in a case where the illegality of the impugned action of an executive or other authority is floating on the surface, which can be established without any elaborate enquiry into the questions involved in the matter. Manifestly, in the matter in band, the petitioner has no clear or undisputed title over the subject land, which is Government land, for, the petitioner claims himself to be the owner of the subject Government land, but he has miserably failed to substantiate his claim of the subject Government land to him; and, thus, this petition is not maintainable. Reliance is Placed on the case of Dr. Sher Afgan Khan Niazi v. Ali S. Habib and others ( 2011 SCMR 1813 ) , wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan has held that:- "10. Besides that what has been discussed herein above there are certain disputed questions of facts which cannot be investigated while exercising Constitutional jurisdiction." It is incumbent upon party seeking constitutional remedy to show that such party has a clear legal right and that such right is so clear as not to admit of a reasonable doubt or controversy... High Court will not go into disputed questions of fact in Constitutional jurisdiction... In Constitutional jurisdiction Court does not go into a question involving lying minute details nor can it decide facts of which no found ion is laid, unless it is shown that such controversy is devoid of supporting record, or perverse."( M.H. Abidi v. Scare Life Insurance Corporation 1990 MLD 563 and Muhammad Nazim v. Rehana Parveen Begum 1990 MLD 344 ). 9. ….In the case of N.W.F.P. Public Service Commission and others v. Muhammad Arif and others ( 2011 SCMR 848 ), wherein, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of. Pakistan has held that:— “9. ...It is well settled by now that "the right which is the foundation of an application under Article 199 is a personal and individual right. The legal right may be a statutory right or a right recognized by the law. A person can be said to be aggrieved only when a person is denied a legal right by someone who has a legal duty to perform relating to the right. There must not only be a right but a justiciable right in existence, to give jurisdiction to the High Court in the matter. Unless whatever right, personal or otherwise, on which the application is based is established, no order can issue under Art. 199." ( Muntizma Committee v. Director K.A. PLD 1992 Kar. 54, Mahmoona v. Ilam Din PLD 1984 Lah. 223, A.F. Farms and Industries v. Development Commr. AIR 1953 Assam 155, Mahboob Khan v. Deputy Commissioner AIR 1953 Assam 145 and Dineshcharan v. State of MB AIR 1953 Madh-B 165)." In view of the above discussion, we are of the opinion that since the title to the land itself is in question. Hence, the same can hardly be adjudicated in writ jurisdiction. Consequently, at the most, we would direct the petitioner to approach the concerned authority for ventilating his grievance and thereafter, if he may be not satisfied, he may resort to a Civil Court for his remedy. The petition is hereby dismissed. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem