EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark MUHAMMAD SHARIF vs The COMMISSIONER, BAHAWALPUR DIVISION, BAHAWALPUR And Others , . Case No. 66 of 1975 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 3 Appeallant: MUHAMMAD SHARIF Respondant: The COMMISSIONER, BAHAWALPUR DIVISION, BAHAWALPUR And Others , . Result: N/A Judgment Date: 1975-01-21 Court: Administrative Tribunal Punjab Judges: Ashfaq Ali Khan Khalid Farooq Akbar Saad Saeed Jan Citations Advocates Statutes 1975 P L C [C S.T.] 85 Judgment ORDER Saad Saood Jan (Chairman).—It is the contention of the learned counsel that the order of the Commissioner is without jurisdiction as the appellants were not made party to the revision. We consider that the order of the Commissioner is entirely of an administrative nature and the appellants should in the first instance approach the Commissioner and raise before him the 4 contention which they intend to take up before us. In case the Commissioner makes an order adverse to them they can, if so advised, come again to the Tribunals. At this stage we are not inclined to entertain this appeal. With these observations this appeal is disposed of. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Administrative Tribunal Punjab Judge(s): Ashfaq Ali Khan, Khalid Farooq Akbar, Saad Saeed Jan Title: MUHAMMAD SHARIF vs The COMMISSIONER, BAHAWALPUR DIVISION, BAHAWALPUR And Others , . Case No.: Case No. 66 of 1975 Date of Judgment: 1975-01-21 Reported As: 1975 P L C [C S.T.] 85 Result: N/A Judgment ORDER Saad Saood Jan (Chairman).—It is the contention of the learned counsel that the order of the Commissioner is without jurisdiction as the appellants were not made party to the revision. We consider that the order of the Commissioner is entirely of an administrative nature and the appellants should in the first instance approach the Commissioner and raise before him the 4 contention which they intend to take up before us. In case the Commissioner makes an order adverse to them they can, if so advised, come again to the Tribunals. At this stage we are not inclined to entertain this appeal. With these observations this appeal is disposed of. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem