EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark NAEEM SHAH AND 14 Other vs ZARIN GUL AND 7 Other Writ Petition No. 639 of 1980 Judgment Details Cited by 1 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: NAEEM SHAH AND 14 Other Respondant: ZARIN GUL AND 7 Other Result: Petition dismissed Judgment Date: 1981-03-22 Court: Peshawar High Court Judges: Shahnawaz Khan Syed Usman Ali Shah Author Citations Advocates Statutes P L D 1981 Peshawar 141 Subsequent References Judgment JUDGMENT USMAN ALI SHAH, J. --The dispute between the parties in this petition relates to a Plot No. 16, situate in Dabgari Gardens, Peshawar Cantt. It is the property of Peshawar Cantonment and was leased out to late Haji Chinar Gul in 1960. Late Chinar Gul in his lifetime inducted the petitioners and respondents 4 to 7 as tenants of the property in question. After the death of Chinar Gul, the sons of Chinar Gul, i. e. Respondents 1 to 3 acquired fresh lease from Cantonment in 1978 and the petitioners and respondents 4 to 7 as their tenants. In the eveci,4 that happened, respondent. I to 4 brought an application in the Court of Rent Controller for the eviction of the petitioners and respondents 4 to 7. The petitioners challenged the eviction proceedings against them mainly on the ground that as the plot in question is a vacant site, the Rent Controller has no jurisdiction in the matter under section 2(a) of the Cantonments Rent Restriction Act, 1963. The learned Controller framed the following issue :- "Whether this Court has no jurisdiction for the trial of the present eviction petition." The learned counsel for the petitioner has agitated the same question before us which had been agitated before the learned Controller. We do not see any substance in this petition which merits dismissal outright. It is not disputed that there are godowns and garages in the property in question and this being so, the property cannot be described a vacant site, because building has been defined in section 2(a) of the Act to mean any building or part of a building, whether residential or not. In view of this provision, as the property in question is one property, its non-residential `t part can as well be the part of the whole property. Even otherwise, the property in question will no longer remain a vacant site. A reference to the impugned order of the learned Rent Controller will show that before him the respondents have produced a sanctioned plan to show that the have intended to raise further structures upon the property. Now the property is surrounded by buildings in a busy and attractive area as Dabgari Gardens, Peshawar Cantt. Therefore, the whole property in which there already exist godowns and garages is to be constructed. In this state of factual position, we are not prepared to believe that the property is or will remain a vacant site and thus the petitioners cannot be allowed to press into service the provision of section 2(a) of the Cantonment Rent Restriction Act, 1963 in a case of this nature. It may be observed that if upon the facts placed on the record, it is clear to the Court that in a locality where a vacant site has the immediate chances and prospects of developing into buildings, the Court should be slow in holding that the site should remain al vacant site in view of the provision of section 2(a), ibid, because if the site is allowed to remain a vacant site, it will militate against the progressive trends in the society. Even on this view of the matter which can very much be attracted to the present case, we hold that the property in question can no longer be termed a vacant site, so as to extend to it the application of sec--petition 2(a) of the Act. This writ petition is, therefore, dismissed with no order as to costs. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Peshawar High Court Judge(s): Shahnawaz Khan, Syed Usman Ali Shah Title: NAEEM SHAH AND 14 Other vs ZARIN GUL AND 7 Other Case No.: Writ Petition No. 639 of 1980 Date of Judgment: 1981-03-22 Reported As: P L D 1981 Peshawar 141 Result: Petition dismissed Judgment JUDGMENT USMAN ALI SHAH, J. --The dispute between the parties in this petition relates to a Plot No. 16, situate in Dabgari Gardens, Peshawar Cantt. It is the property of Peshawar Cantonment and was leased out to late Haji Chinar Gul in 1960. Late Chinar Gul in his lifetime inducted the petitioners and respondents 4 to 7 as tenants of the property in question. After the death of Chinar Gul, the sons of Chinar Gul, i. e. Respondents 1 to 3 acquired fresh lease from Cantonment in 1978 and the petitioners and respondents 4 to 7 as their tenants. In the eveci,4 that happened, respondent. I to 4 brought an application in the Court of Rent Controller for the eviction of the petitioners and respondents 4 to 7. The petitioners challenged the eviction proceedings against them mainly on the ground that as the plot in question is a vacant site, the Rent Controller has no jurisdiction in the matter under section 2(a) of the Cantonments Rent Restriction Act, 1963. The learned Controller framed the following issue :- "Whether this Court has no jurisdiction for the trial of the present eviction petition." The learned counsel for the petitioner has agitated the same question before us which had been agitated before the learned Controller. We do not see any substance in this petition which merits dismissal outright. It is not disputed that there are godowns and garages in the property in question and this being so, the property cannot be described a vacant site, because building has been defined in section 2(a) of the Act to mean any building or part of a building, whether residential or not. In view of this provision, as the property in question is one property, its non-residential `t part can as well be the part of the whole property. Even otherwise, the property in question will no longer remain a vacant site. A reference to the impugned order of the learned Rent Controller will show that before him the respondents have produced a sanctioned plan to show that the have intended to raise further structures upon the property. Now the property is surrounded by buildings in a busy and attractive area as Dabgari Gardens, Peshawar Cantt. Therefore, the whole property in which there already exist godowns and garages is to be constructed. In this state of factual position, we are not prepared to believe that the property is or will remain a vacant site and thus the petitioners cannot be allowed to press into service the provision of section 2(a) of the Cantonment Rent Restriction Act, 1963 in a case of this nature. It may be observed that if upon the facts placed on the record, it is clear to the Court that in a locality where a vacant site has the immediate chances and prospects of developing into buildings, the Court should be slow in holding that the site should remain al vacant site in view of the provision of section 2(a), ibid, because if the site is allowed to remain a vacant site, it will militate against the progressive trends in the society. Even on this view of the matter which can very much be attracted to the present case, we hold that the property in question can no longer be termed a vacant site, so as to extend to it the application of sec--petition 2(a) of the Act. This writ petition is, therefore, dismissed with no order as to costs. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-14 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem