EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark NAIMATULLAH and another vs ABDUL QAHAR and 2 others Criminal Revision Petition No, 108 of 2005 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: NAIMATULLAH and another Respondant: ABDUL QAHAR and 2 others Result: Petition dismissed Judgment Date: 2005-12-28 Court: Balochistan High Court Judges: Mehta Kelash Nath Kohli Amanullah Khan Yasinzai Citations Advocates Statutes PLJ 2006 Cr.C. (Quetta) 811 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT Mehta Kailash Nath Kohli, J .--Facts of the case, in brief, are that on the basis of -report lodged by Naimatullah soh of Muhammad Musa, an FIR was registered on 31st January, 2003 by Police Station Sariab, Quetta, wherein; he has alleged that he owns a cycle repair shop at Pood Killi Chowk Quetta; at 1:30 p.m. the went from his shop to Ittihad colony and found two of his neighbourers namely Abdul Qahar and Zia-ud-din who bear vagabond character. It was further alleged that Zia-ud-Din was holding a dagger while, Abdul Qahar was holding an axe, coming out from his house; his neighbourer was having his ablution, who had also seen accused persons running from his house; when he entered in his house, saw his younger brother, who was lying in a pool of blood and palpitating. Similarly when he reached in corridor and saw his sister Bibi Rubiqa aged 13/14 years in a pool of blood lying dead, while his sister's son namely Samiullah aged three years was also lying in a pool of blood and was dead. Complainant understood that this offence has been committed by Abdul Qahar and Zia-ud-Din. It was further stated that he reacted to the said incident and also stated that his father went for earning bread, while his mother alongwith his sister had gone to Sanh;i, as son of his sister was ailing and she had gone to bring Taveez . In such circumstances, accused-respondents were arrested, they were put to trial; they denied the allegations. On the basis of material, the learned Special Judge Anti Terrorism Court-I, Quetta vide judgment dated 12th June, 2003, convicted the private respondents for death penalty, as also respondent Abdul Qahar was convicted under Section-10(3) Offence of Zina (Enforcement of Hadood) Ordinance, 1979 in view of Section-7 readwith Section-21-M(2) of the Anti Terrorism Act, 1997. Learned Special Court had also sent Reference No, 6 of 2003 for confirmation of death sentence. Against said judgment, private respondents filed Appeal No, 27 of 2003. A Division Bench of this Court vide judgment dated 23rd May, 2005, was pleased to hold that the case is exclusively triable by the Juvenile Court. Relevant observation of the Hon'ble Division Bench, are reproduced herein-below:-- "In view of the above discussion, the appeal is partly accepted and the impugned judgment dated 12.6.2003 passed by learned Special Judge, ATC-I, Quetta, is set aside and the case is remanded to the Juvenile Court, with directions to dispose of the same to rewrite the Judgment on the basis of evidence recorded by the trial Court. However, the learned Juvenile Court after hearing both the parties to rewrite the judgment on its own merits without being influenced from the judgment dated 12.6.2003 passed by learned Special Judge, ATC-I, Quetta." After remand of the case, learned Judge under the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000, convicted and sentenced the private respondents, in the manner herein-below mentioned:— "Thus, in the light of above, the accused Abdul Qahar is convicted and sentenced under Section 302(b) readwith 34 PPC for life imprisonment as Ta'zir for commission of murder of deceased Bibi Robiqa and also ordered to pay Rs, 100,000/- (Rupees one Lac only) as compensation to the legal heirs of deceased Bibi Robiqa in view of Section 544-A Cr.P.C. In default of payment, accused further will suffer SI for six (6) months. However, accused Abdul Qahar has committed Zina-bil-Jabr of Ta'zir with deceased Mst. Robiqa as 1 have discussed hereinbefore, while admittedly accused is a minor, therefore, he is convicted and sentenced under Section 7 read with Section 10 of the Offence of Zina (Enforcement of Hadood) Ordinance, 1979 for a period of five years RI and fine of Rs, 5000/-, in default of fine, accused further will suffer SI for one (1) year. Accused Abdul Qahar is also convicted and sentenced under Section 302(b) readwith 34 PPC for life imprisonment as Ta'zir for murder of deceased Samiullah and also ordered to pay Its. 100,000/- (Rupees one Lac only) as compensation to the legal heirs of deceased Samiullah in view of Section 544-A Cr.P.C. In default of payment, accused further will suffer SI for six months. Accused Abdul Qahar is further convicted and sentenced under Section 302(b) read with 34 PPC for life imprisonment as Ta'zir for murder of deceased Roohullah and also ordered to pay Rs, 100,000/- (rupees one lac only) as compensation to the legal heirs of deceased Roohullah in view of Section 544-A Cr.P.C. In default of payment, accused further will suffer SI for six (6) months. While accused Zia-ud-Din is convicted and sentenced under Section 302 (b) read with 34 PPC for life imprisonment as Ta'zir for commission of murder of deceased Bibi Rubiqa and also ordered to pay Rs, 100,000/- Rupees one lac only) as compensation to the legal heirs of deceased Bibi Robiqa in view of Section 544-A Cr.P.C. In default of payment, accused further will suffer SI for six (6) months. He is also convicted and sentenced under Section 302 (b) read with PPC for life imprisonment as Ta'zir murder of deceased Samiullah and also ordered to pay Rs, 100,000/- (rupees one Lac only) as compensation to the legal heirs of deceased Samiullah in view of Section 544-A Cr.P.C. In default of payment, accused further will suffer SI for six (6) months. Accused Zia-ud-din is further convicted and sentenced under Section 302 (b) readwith 34 PPC for life imprisonment as Ta'zir for murder of deceased Roohullah and also ordered to pay Rs, 100,000/- (rupees one lac only) as compensation to the legal heirs of deceased Roohullah in view of Section 544-A Cr.P.C. In default of payment, accused further will suffer SI fOr six (6) months. However, benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. is extended in favour of both the accused and the period, which accused have spent as under trial prisoners be deducted from their original sentences." Against aforementioned judgment, present petition for enhancement of sentence has been filed. We have heard Mr. Azizullah Kakar, learned counsel for petitioners. During course of arguments, it was pointed out that the matter was remanded by this Court vide judgment dated 23rd May, 2005 to the Juvenile Court by holding that the private respondents are covered under Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000; the said judgment was accepted by all concerned and after remand of the case, the learned Juvenile Court has passed the maximum sentence provided by the law. It was pointed out to the learned counsel that how this petition for enhancement of sentence to that of death penalty is covered in view of above Ordinance. Learned counsel has not been able to properly answer the same. However, it is beneficial to reproduce Section-12 of the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000, herein-below:-- "12. Orders that shall not be passed with respect to a child.-- Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time being in force no child shall be-- (a) awarded punishment of death, or ordered to labour during the time spent in any Borstal or such other institution; and (b) handcuffed, put in fetters or given any corporal punishment at any time while in custody: Provided that where there is reasonable apprehension of the escape of the child from custody, he may be handcuffed." The above provision of law clearly provides that the respondents--accused being Juvenile, cannot be awarded punishment of death. Similarly, they cannot be ordered to labour etc. In view of the clear bar contained in, the law, which is applicable to the facts and circumstances of the case, the present petition for enhancement of sentence is not competent in law. The Legislature has clearly provided the maximum punishment for the juveniles, who are covered under the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000. In such circumstances of the case, the petition for enhancement of sentence to death, is not maintainable, and thus; the same is dismissed in limine. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Balochistan High Court Judge(s): Mehta Kelash Nath Kohli, Amanullah Khan Yasinzai Title: NAIMATULLAH and another vs ABDUL QAHAR and 2 others Case No.: Criminal Revision Petition No, 108 of 2005 Date of Judgment: 2005-12-28 Reported As: PLJ 2006 Cr.C. (Quetta) 811 Result: Petition dismissed Judgment JUDGMENT Mehta Kailash Nath Kohli, J .--Facts of the case, in brief, are that on the basis of -report lodged by Naimatullah soh of Muhammad Musa, an FIR was registered on 31st January, 2003 by Police Station Sariab, Quetta, wherein; he has alleged that he owns a cycle repair shop at Pood Killi Chowk Quetta; at 1:30 p.m. the went from his shop to Ittihad colony and found two of his neighbourers namely Abdul Qahar and Zia-ud-din who bear vagabond character. It was further alleged that Zia-ud-Din was holding a dagger while, Abdul Qahar was holding an axe, coming out from his house; his neighbourer was having his ablution, who had also seen accused persons running from his house; when he entered in his house, saw his younger brother, who was lying in a pool of blood and palpitating. Similarly when he reached in corridor and saw his sister Bibi Rubiqa aged 13/14 years in a pool of blood lying dead, while his sister's son namely Samiullah aged three years was also lying in a pool of blood and was dead. Complainant understood that this offence has been committed by Abdul Qahar and Zia-ud-Din. It was further stated that he reacted to the said incident and also stated that his father went for earning bread, while his mother alongwith his sister had gone to Sanh;i, as son of his sister was ailing and she had gone to bring Taveez . In such circumstances, accused-respondents were arrested, they were put to trial; they denied the allegations. On the basis of material, the learned Special Judge Anti Terrorism Court-I, Quetta vide judgment dated 12th June, 2003, convicted the private respondents for death penalty, as also respondent Abdul Qahar was convicted under Section-10(3) Offence of Zina (Enforcement of Hadood) Ordinance, 1979 in view of Section-7 readwith Section-21-M(2) of the Anti Terrorism Act, 1997. Learned Special Court had also sent Reference No, 6 of 2003 for confirmation of death sentence. Against said judgment, private respondents filed Appeal No, 27 of 2003. A Division Bench of this Court vide judgment dated 23rd May, 2005, was pleased to hold that the case is exclusively triable by the Juvenile Court. Relevant observation of the Hon'ble Division Bench, are reproduced herein-below:-- "In view of the above discussion, the appeal is partly accepted and the impugned judgment dated 12.6.2003 passed by learned Special Judge, ATC-I, Quetta, is set aside and the case is remanded to the Juvenile Court, with directions to dispose of the same to rewrite the Judgment on the basis of evidence recorded by the trial Court. However, the learned Juvenile Court after hearing both the parties to rewrite the judgment on its own merits without being influenced from the judgment dated 12.6.2003 passed by learned Special Judge, ATC-I, Quetta." After remand of the case, learned Judge under the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000, convicted and sentenced the private respondents, in the manner herein-below mentioned:— "Thus, in the light of above, the accused Abdul Qahar is convicted and sentenced under Section 302(b) readwith 34 PPC for life imprisonment as Ta'zir for commission of murder of deceased Bibi Robiqa and also ordered to pay Rs, 100,000/- (Rupees one Lac only) as compensation to the legal heirs of deceased Bibi Robiqa in view of Section 544-A Cr.P.C. In default of payment, accused further will suffer SI for six (6) months. However, accused Abdul Qahar has committed Zina-bil-Jabr of Ta'zir with deceased Mst. Robiqa as 1 have discussed hereinbefore, while admittedly accused is a minor, therefore, he is convicted and sentenced under Section 7 read with Section 10 of the Offence of Zina (Enforcement of Hadood) Ordinance, 1979 for a period of five years RI and fine of Rs, 5000/-, in default of fine, accused further will suffer SI for one (1) year. Accused Abdul Qahar is also convicted and sentenced under Section 302(b) readwith 34 PPC for life imprisonment as Ta'zir for murder of deceased Samiullah and also ordered to pay Its. 100,000/- (Rupees one Lac only) as compensation to the legal heirs of deceased Samiullah in view of Section 544-A Cr.P.C. In default of payment, accused further will suffer SI for six months. Accused Abdul Qahar is further convicted and sentenced under Section 302(b) read with 34 PPC for life imprisonment as Ta'zir for murder of deceased Roohullah and also ordered to pay Rs, 100,000/- (rupees one lac only) as compensation to the legal heirs of deceased Roohullah in view of Section 544-A Cr.P.C. In default of payment, accused further will suffer SI for six (6) months. While accused Zia-ud-Din is convicted and sentenced under Section 302 (b) read with 34 PPC for life imprisonment as Ta'zir for commission of murder of deceased Bibi Rubiqa and also ordered to pay Rs, 100,000/- Rupees one lac only) as compensation to the legal heirs of deceased Bibi Robiqa in view of Section 544-A Cr.P.C. In default of payment, accused further will suffer SI for six (6) months. He is also convicted and sentenced under Section 302 (b) read with PPC for life imprisonment as Ta'zir murder of deceased Samiullah and also ordered to pay Rs, 100,000/- (rupees one Lac only) as compensation to the legal heirs of deceased Samiullah in view of Section 544-A Cr.P.C. In default of payment, accused further will suffer SI for six (6) months. Accused Zia-ud-din is further convicted and sentenced under Section 302 (b) readwith 34 PPC for life imprisonment as Ta'zir for murder of deceased Roohullah and also ordered to pay Rs, 100,000/- (rupees one lac only) as compensation to the legal heirs of deceased Roohullah in view of Section 544-A Cr.P.C. In default of payment, accused further will suffer SI fOr six (6) months. However, benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. is extended in favour of both the accused and the period, which accused have spent as under trial prisoners be deducted from their original sentences." Against aforementioned judgment, present petition for enhancement of sentence has been filed. We have heard Mr. Azizullah Kakar, learned counsel for petitioners. During course of arguments, it was pointed out that the matter was remanded by this Court vide judgment dated 23rd May, 2005 to the Juvenile Court by holding that the private respondents are covered under Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000; the said judgment was accepted by all concerned and after remand of the case, the learned Juvenile Court has passed the maximum sentence provided by the law. It was pointed out to the learned counsel that how this petition for enhancement of sentence to that of death penalty is covered in view of above Ordinance. Learned counsel has not been able to properly answer the same. However, it is beneficial to reproduce Section-12 of the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000, herein-below:-- "12. Orders that shall not be passed with respect to a child.-- Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time being in force no child shall be-- (a) awarded punishment of death, or ordered to labour during the time spent in any Borstal or such other institution; and (b) handcuffed, put in fetters or given any corporal punishment at any time while in custody: Provided that where there is reasonable apprehension of the escape of the child from custody, he may be handcuffed." The above provision of law clearly provides that the respondents--accused being Juvenile, cannot be awarded punishment of death. Similarly, they cannot be ordered to labour etc. In view of the clear bar contained in, the law, which is applicable to the facts and circumstances of the case, the present petition for enhancement of sentence is not competent in law. The Legislature has clearly provided the maximum punishment for the juveniles, who are covered under the Juvenile Justice System Ordinance, 2000. In such circumstances of the case, the petition for enhancement of sentence to death, is not maintainable, and thus; the same is dismissed in limine. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem