EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark NASEEM HAIDER, JUNIOR DRAWING TEACHER, HIGH SCHOOL LOWAT, DISTRICT NEELUM, AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR vs SECRETARY EDUCATION, AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR MUZAFFARABAD and 7 others Service Appeal No, 96 of 2007 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: NASEEM HAIDER, JUNIOR DRAWING TEACHER, HIGH SCHOOL LOWAT, DISTRICT NEELUM, AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR Respondant: SECRETARY EDUCATION, AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR MUZAFFARABAD and 7 others Result: Appeal dismissed Judgment Date: 2009-04-15 Court: Azad Jammu and Kashmir Service Tribunal Judges: Azhar Saleem Babar Malik Abdul Rashid Citations Advocates Statutes PLJ 2009 Tr.C. (Services) 185 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT Azhar Saleem Babar, Member. --The appellant has assailed the order dated 12.3.2007 through the instant appeal, whereby he has been removed from service. The appeal was filed on 14.3.2007 and it was admitted for regular hearing on 15.3.2007. It is worth mentioning at the very outset that no interim relief was granted to the appellant while recording the order of admission of appeal. 2. The facts formulating the background of this appeal are that the appellant was appointed as Junior Drawing Teacher in, High School Lowat on 4.2.2006 on recommendations of the appropriate selection committee. The appellant joined his service in pursuance of the recruitment order but later on, the order of appointment of the appellant was cancelled on 3.3.2006. The appellant filed an appeal before the Service Tribunal and obtained a status quo order. However, during the pendecy of that appeal, the order of cancellation of the appellant's appointment was withdrawn on 26.2.2007, entailing the dismissal of appeal as having become infructuous. The appellant has further expressed that he has been removed from service vide impugned order dated 12.3.2007 without any legal excuse. It has been contended on behalf of the appellant that he was recruited as Junior Drawing Teacher on recommendations of the concerned selection committee, so the order of his ouster from job was not in accordance with the law. Furthermore that the appellant was neither given a notice nor was he charge sheeted before passing the order of removal from service. The appellant has also complained that he has not been given a chance of hearing before imparting such a punishment. The appellant is of the view that Respondent No, 6, Headmaster Boys High School Lowat was not the proper authority to remove the appellant from service, so the order impugned is bad in law. 3. The official respondents were summoned in accordance with the rules and objections to appeal were filed on behalf of the respondents on 27.3.2007. The official respondents have contended that after the ouster of the appellant from job, one Kh. Ejaz Ahmed has been appointed as Junior Drawing Teacher in place of the appellant. Kh. Ejaz Ahmed was a necessary party to the appeal and the appeal is not maintainable without impleading him as a party. Furthermore that Kh. Ejaz Ahmed is a regular employee of the Education Department and if the order is suspended or rescinded. Kh. Ejaz Ahmed would be ousted from job. The respondents are further of the view that appointing authority, by rules, for the post of Junior Drawing Teacher is Divisional Director Schools. The order of appointment of the appellant was issued by the Director Education Schools Technical who was not competent to issue the same. When the Director Education Schools Technical was apprised of the mistake, she cancelled the order of appointment of the appellant on 3.3.2006. The appellant filed an appeal before the Service Tribunal and succeeded in obtaining a status quo order. The respondents are of the view that on account of having been removed from service, the appellant was not entitled to monthly salary. However, the appellant took benefit of the position of his father who is functioning as Headmaster in the same institution and wrongfully obtained monthly salary from the national exchequer Divisional Director Schools Muzaffarabad has further elaborated that the arguments in the previous appeal filed by Naseem Haider, appellant were heard and the judgment was reserved, when the appellant decided to withdraw his appeal because he knew that the Court may pass an adverse order against him keeping in view the facts of the case. It has also been explained that the Divisional Director Schools Muzaffarabad was competent to issue the order of termination of appellant's service and he accordingly issued the same. In pursuance of the orders issued by the Divisional Director Schools, the Headmaster has rightly removed the appellant from job. 4. The appellant did not file a replication. The arguments in the instant case were heard on 8.4.2009. 5. We have given due consideration to the arguments advanced at Bar and gone through the record annexed with the file as well. A perisal of the order of initial appointment of the appellant dated 4.2.2006 transpires that the appellant was recruited as Junior Drawing Teacher in BPS-9 on temporary basis. Although the preamble of the order indicates that it was issued on recommendations of the selection committee and with the consent of District Education Officer Secondary district Neelum, however, the operative part of the order reads as under:-- A bare reading of the order reveals that it was temporary in nature. It has impliedly been admitted by the appellant that Director Education Schools (Technical) was not competent to issue the order of appointment of the appellant as Junior Drawing Teacher. By not filing a replication, it has also been admitted that Divisional Director Schools is the appropriate authority to issue the order of appointment of the appellant as Junior Drawing Teacher in NPS-9. It has also not been rebutted by the appellant that the initial order of appointment of the appellant was made without the post having been duly advertised. In such a situation, when the Director Education Schools (Technical) was apprised of a mistake committed on her behalf, she rightly withdrew the order of appointment of the appellant. A departmental inquiry may be initiated against the Headmaster, Boys High School Lowat if he has misused his powers to benefit his son by imparting monthly salary to the appellant. It is worth mentioning that the order of termination of appellant's service was issued by the Director Education Schools Muzaffarabad Division on 7.3.2007, in pursuance of which the Headmaster Government Boys High School Lowat issued the impugned order. The order does not suffer from any legal flaw. 6. For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is dismissed with costs. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Azad Jammu and Kashmir Service Tribunal Judge(s): Azhar Saleem Babar, Malik Abdul Rashid Title: NASEEM HAIDER, JUNIOR DRAWING TEACHER, HIGH SCHOOL LOWAT, DISTRICT NEELUM, AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR vs SECRETARY EDUCATION, AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR MUZAFFARABAD and 7 others Case No.: Service Appeal No, 96 of 2007 Date of Judgment: 2009-04-15 Reported As: PLJ 2009 Tr.C. (Services) 185 Result: Appeal dismissed Judgment JUDGMENT Azhar Saleem Babar, Member. --The appellant has assailed the order dated 12.3.2007 through the instant appeal, whereby he has been removed from service. The appeal was filed on 14.3.2007 and it was admitted for regular hearing on 15.3.2007. It is worth mentioning at the very outset that no interim relief was granted to the appellant while recording the order of admission of appeal. 2. The facts formulating the background of this appeal are that the appellant was appointed as Junior Drawing Teacher in, High School Lowat on 4.2.2006 on recommendations of the appropriate selection committee. The appellant joined his service in pursuance of the recruitment order but later on, the order of appointment of the appellant was cancelled on 3.3.2006. The appellant filed an appeal before the Service Tribunal and obtained a status quo order. However, during the pendecy of that appeal, the order of cancellation of the appellant's appointment was withdrawn on 26.2.2007, entailing the dismissal of appeal as having become infructuous. The appellant has further expressed that he has been removed from service vide impugned order dated 12.3.2007 without any legal excuse. It has been contended on behalf of the appellant that he was recruited as Junior Drawing Teacher on recommendations of the concerned selection committee, so the order of his ouster from job was not in accordance with the law. Furthermore that the appellant was neither given a notice nor was he charge sheeted before passing the order of removal from service. The appellant has also complained that he has not been given a chance of hearing before imparting such a punishment. The appellant is of the view that Respondent No, 6, Headmaster Boys High School Lowat was not the proper authority to remove the appellant from service, so the order impugned is bad in law. 3. The official respondents were summoned in accordance with the rules and objections to appeal were filed on behalf of the respondents on 27.3.2007. The official respondents have contended that after the ouster of the appellant from job, one Kh. Ejaz Ahmed has been appointed as Junior Drawing Teacher in place of the appellant. Kh. Ejaz Ahmed was a necessary party to the appeal and the appeal is not maintainable without impleading him as a party. Furthermore that Kh. Ejaz Ahmed is a regular employee of the Education Department and if the order is suspended or rescinded. Kh. Ejaz Ahmed would be ousted from job. The respondents are further of the view that appointing authority, by rules, for the post of Junior Drawing Teacher is Divisional Director Schools. The order of appointment of the appellant was issued by the Director Education Schools Technical who was not competent to issue the same. When the Director Education Schools Technical was apprised of the mistake, she cancelled the order of appointment of the appellant on 3.3.2006. The appellant filed an appeal before the Service Tribunal and succeeded in obtaining a status quo order. The respondents are of the view that on account of having been removed from service, the appellant was not entitled to monthly salary. However, the appellant took benefit of the position of his father who is functioning as Headmaster in the same institution and wrongfully obtained monthly salary from the national exchequer Divisional Director Schools Muzaffarabad has further elaborated that the arguments in the previous appeal filed by Naseem Haider, appellant were heard and the judgment was reserved, when the appellant decided to withdraw his appeal because he knew that the Court may pass an adverse order against him keeping in view the facts of the case. It has also been explained that the Divisional Director Schools Muzaffarabad was competent to issue the order of termination of appellant's service and he accordingly issued the same. In pursuance of the orders issued by the Divisional Director Schools, the Headmaster has rightly removed the appellant from job. 4. The appellant did not file a replication. The arguments in the instant case were heard on 8.4.2009. 5. We have given due consideration to the arguments advanced at Bar and gone through the record annexed with the file as well. A perisal of the order of initial appointment of the appellant dated 4.2.2006 transpires that the appellant was recruited as Junior Drawing Teacher in BPS-9 on temporary basis. Although the preamble of the order indicates that it was issued on recommendations of the selection committee and with the consent of District Education Officer Secondary district Neelum, however, the operative part of the order reads as under:-- A bare reading of the order reveals that it was temporary in nature. It has impliedly been admitted by the appellant that Director Education Schools (Technical) was not competent to issue the order of appointment of the appellant as Junior Drawing Teacher. By not filing a replication, it has also been admitted that Divisional Director Schools is the appropriate authority to issue the order of appointment of the appellant as Junior Drawing Teacher in NPS-9. It has also not been rebutted by the appellant that the initial order of appointment of the appellant was made without the post having been duly advertised. In such a situation, when the Director Education Schools (Technical) was apprised of a mistake committed on her behalf, she rightly withdrew the order of appointment of the appellant. A departmental inquiry may be initiated against the Headmaster, Boys High School Lowat if he has misused his powers to benefit his son by imparting monthly salary to the appellant. It is worth mentioning that the order of termination of appellant's service was issued by the Director Education Schools Muzaffarabad Division on 7.3.2007, in pursuance of which the Headmaster Government Boys High School Lowat issued the impugned order. The order does not suffer from any legal flaw. 6. For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is dismissed with costs. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem