EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark NISAR AHMAD vs THE STATE R. 0. R. No, 1443 of 1985,. Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: NISAR AHMAD Respondant: THE STATE Result: Revision dismissed Judgment Date: 1985-07-23 Court: Board of Revenue, Punjab Judges: S. M. Nasim Citations Advocates Statutes P L D 1986 Rev. 31 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' This is a revision petition against the order of Additional Commissioner (Revenue) Faisalabad dated 13-3-1985 whereby he dismissed the appeal of the petitioner against the order of AC/Collector Samundri dated 27-11-1984 vide which he in compliance with the directive of the Board of Revenue reviewed his previous order dated 27-8-1980 and cancelled it vide which he had allowed proprietary rights of Sqr. No, 55/5 measuring 4 Kanals situated in Chak No, 488/G.B. To the petitioner. 2. The facts of the case are that the petitioner was allowed proprietary rights of the disputed land under Notification dated 3-9-1979 by the AC/Collector Samundari vide his order dated 27-8-1980. The Audit Officer of the Board of Revenue raised objection that the petitioner owned more than four acres of land and thus was not eligible for the extension of his lease after Rabi 1978, and the extension made in his favour from Kharif 1978 to Rabi 1983 was against the rules. The AC/Collec tor moved for the review of the order passed by him. The Board of Revenue vide its letter No, 475/ACC dated 3-3-1983 approved the Audit Note of the Audit Officer and intimated to the AC/Collector and allowed him to review his order dated 27-8-1980. The AC/Collector reviewed his order and withdiew it and resumed the land in favour of State. Aggrieved by this order the petitioner filed appeal before the Additional Commissioner who rejected the same. Hence this revision petition. 3. I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner at length and gone through the grounds of revision. The petitioner was prospective owner of more than four acres of land. The concurrent findings of the lower Courts have not been shown to suffer from any material irregularity. The revision petition is, therefore, dismissed. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue, Punjab Judge(s): S. M. Nasim Title: NISAR AHMAD vs THE STATE Case No.: R. 0. R. No, 1443 of 1985,. Date of Judgment: 1985-07-23 Reported As: P L D 1986 Rev. 31 Result: Revision dismissed Judgment ORDER ' This is a revision petition against the order of Additional Commissioner (Revenue) Faisalabad dated 13-3-1985 whereby he dismissed the appeal of the petitioner against the order of AC/Collector Samundri dated 27-11-1984 vide which he in compliance with the directive of the Board of Revenue reviewed his previous order dated 27-8-1980 and cancelled it vide which he had allowed proprietary rights of Sqr. No, 55/5 measuring 4 Kanals situated in Chak No, 488/G.B. To the petitioner. 2. The facts of the case are that the petitioner was allowed proprietary rights of the disputed land under Notification dated 3-9-1979 by the AC/Collector Samundari vide his order dated 27-8-1980. The Audit Officer of the Board of Revenue raised objection that the petitioner owned more than four acres of land and thus was not eligible for the extension of his lease after Rabi 1978, and the extension made in his favour from Kharif 1978 to Rabi 1983 was against the rules. The AC/Collec tor moved for the review of the order passed by him. The Board of Revenue vide its letter No, 475/ACC dated 3-3-1983 approved the Audit Note of the Audit Officer and intimated to the AC/Collector and allowed him to review his order dated 27-8-1980. The AC/Collector reviewed his order and withdiew it and resumed the land in favour of State. Aggrieved by this order the petitioner filed appeal before the Additional Commissioner who rejected the same. Hence this revision petition. 3. I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner at length and gone through the grounds of revision. The petitioner was prospective owner of more than four acres of land. The concurrent findings of the lower Courts have not been shown to suffer from any material irregularity. The revision petition is, therefore, dismissed. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem