EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark NOOR MUHAMMAD vs MUHAMMAD ASHRAF And 7 OTHER Review No.36 of 1988 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: NOOR MUHAMMAD Respondant: MUHAMMAD ASHRAF And 7 OTHER Result: Order accordingly Judgment Date: 1990-03-21 Court: Board of Revenue Judges: Asad Ali Shah Citations Advocates Statutes 1990 C L C 1929 Judgment ORDER This is an application for review of orders passed by this Court on 9-2--1988 in R.O.R. No.1277/1987 (Muhammad Ashraf etc. v. State etc.) in which it was decided that while Muhammad Ashraf etc. As heirs of the late Hafiz Muhammad Khan had no right to purchase the Lambardari grant in Chak No.48/DNB, Noor Muhammad the present Lambardar also could not be allotted the said Lambardari grant for the present as the scheme for allotment of lots of Lambardars had been suspended. It was, therefore, ordered that since Muhammad Ashraf etc. Were still in possession, they should be given the land on temporary lease on year to year basis on market rent provided they give an undertaking to surrender its possession at any time, without compensation, if required for a public purpose including allotment to a permanent Lambardar under Government Policy the present applicant Noor Muhammad has contested the above decision on the ground that Muhammad Ashraf etc. Were not in occupation of the impugned land and that although Muhammad Khan (predecessor-in-interest of Muhammad Ashraf etc.) had failed upto the Supreme Court, his heirs had been allowed lease, specially when they already had about 400 Kanals of their own land. 2.I have heard both parties through their respective counsel and seen the record. The impugned order does not grant right of any kind to Muhammad Ashraf etc. In respect of the impugned land which continues to be reserved as a Lambardari Lot. However, as mentioned in the order according to the existing Government policy no fresh allotment/lease can be made to a Lambardar. It was in these circumstances and on the specific consideration that Muhammad Ashraf etc. Were still in possession of the impugned land that they were allowed to continue their occupation on year to year basis. It was also stipulated that they would give an undertaking in writing to surrender the possession of the land as soon as the Government directs them to do so. Consequently, if the said Muhammad Ashraf etc. Are no longer in occupation of the land, they cannot take advantage of the impugned order and no clarification is needed. However, if they are in possession, then it is hereby clarified that they are neither regular lessees nor have they any right as a lessee under any temporary cultivation scheme. They have been merely allowed to continue as a matter of convenience on year to 'year basis on payment of market rent. 1t is thus, a purely temporary arrangement which will be discontinued after the promulgation of a policy regarding allotment of Lambardari grants by the Government. 3. The present application is therefore disposed of with the above clarification. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue Judge(s): Asad Ali Shah Title: NOOR MUHAMMAD vs MUHAMMAD ASHRAF And 7 OTHER Case No.: Review No.36 of 1988 Date of Judgment: 1990-03-21 Reported As: 1990 C L C 1929 Result: Order accordingly Judgment ORDER This is an application for review of orders passed by this Court on 9-2--1988 in R.O.R. No.1277/1987 (Muhammad Ashraf etc. v. State etc.) in which it was decided that while Muhammad Ashraf etc. As heirs of the late Hafiz Muhammad Khan had no right to purchase the Lambardari grant in Chak No.48/DNB, Noor Muhammad the present Lambardar also could not be allotted the said Lambardari grant for the present as the scheme for allotment of lots of Lambardars had been suspended. It was, therefore, ordered that since Muhammad Ashraf etc. Were still in possession, they should be given the land on temporary lease on year to year basis on market rent provided they give an undertaking to surrender its possession at any time, without compensation, if required for a public purpose including allotment to a permanent Lambardar under Government Policy the present applicant Noor Muhammad has contested the above decision on the ground that Muhammad Ashraf etc. Were not in occupation of the impugned land and that although Muhammad Khan (predecessor-in-interest of Muhammad Ashraf etc.) had failed upto the Supreme Court, his heirs had been allowed lease, specially when they already had about 400 Kanals of their own land. 2.I have heard both parties through their respective counsel and seen the record. The impugned order does not grant right of any kind to Muhammad Ashraf etc. In respect of the impugned land which continues to be reserved as a Lambardari Lot. However, as mentioned in the order according to the existing Government policy no fresh allotment/lease can be made to a Lambardar. It was in these circumstances and on the specific consideration that Muhammad Ashraf etc. Were still in possession of the impugned land that they were allowed to continue their occupation on year to year basis. It was also stipulated that they would give an undertaking in writing to surrender the possession of the land as soon as the Government directs them to do so. Consequently, if the said Muhammad Ashraf etc. Are no longer in occupation of the land, they cannot take advantage of the impugned order and no clarification is needed. However, if they are in possession, then it is hereby clarified that they are neither regular lessees nor have they any right as a lessee under any temporary cultivation scheme. They have been merely allowed to continue as a matter of convenience on year to 'year basis on payment of market rent. 1t is thus, a purely temporary arrangement which will be discontinued after the promulgation of a policy regarding allotment of Lambardari grants by the Government. 3. The present application is therefore disposed of with the above clarification. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem