EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark PUBLIC BUS SERVICE (REGD.) MONTGOMERY-- vs THE R. T. A. MULTAN And 8 TRANSPORT COMPANIES Appeal No. 83 of 1954 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: PUBLIC BUS SERVICE (REGD.) MONTGOMERY-- Respondant: THE R. T. A. MULTAN And 8 TRANSPORT COMPANIES Result: A. Judgment Date: 1955-10-05 Court: Board of Revenue, Punjab Judges: Nasir Ahmad Citations Advocates Statutes P L D 1956 (Rev.) Punjab 8 Judgment ORDER NASIR AHMAD, F. C.- This order will dispose of the eight connected transport appeals Nos. 83 to 90 of 1954-55. The appellant company-The Public Bus Service Mont--gomery-applied for a large number of permits on eight important routes like Montgomery-Lahore, Montgomery-- Multan, Montgomery-Suleimanke, Montgomery-Lyallpur. Montgomery-Pakpattan, etc. To the Regional Transport Authority Multan. All these applications were rejected vide their resolution No. 21 in the meeting held on 23rd and 24th July 1955. The main reason given for the rejection was that the appellant company is a family concern, members of which are already running other transport and goods services and that there were better claimants in case it was considered necessary in the public interest to increase transport facilities on these routes. The appellant's main contention before me has been that though the members of this new concern belong to the same family, other members of which are engaged in transport and goods service, that fact in itself should not constitute a bar against them from increasing their activities in case public demand for improving transport facilities on the various routes for which they had applied, did exist. In this connection I have also been referred to certain observations made by me in Rajput Bus and Transport Company v. R. T. A. Rawalpindi (P L D 1955 (Rev.) Pb. 5), I am afraid this argument which was given by me in that ruling has been misinterpreted, as the appellants do not constitute a new concern but if I might say so it is only old wine in new bottles. The majority of the appellants are already in the transport business and it was against the creation of monopolies in public utility undertakings that I have made the remarks referred to above. In this case the parties want to circumvent the general principle contained in the observation made by me by coming under a different name. In my opinion the decision which the R. T. A. Have arrived at is in accord with public policy and the appeals stand rejected. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue, Punjab Judge(s): Nasir Ahmad Title: PUBLIC BUS SERVICE (REGD.) MONTGOMERY-- vs THE R. T. A. MULTAN And 8 TRANSPORT COMPANIES Case No.: Appeal No. 83 of 1954 Date of Judgment: 1955-10-05 Reported As: P L D 1956 (Rev.) Punjab 8 Result: A. Judgment ORDER NASIR AHMAD, F. C.- This order will dispose of the eight connected transport appeals Nos. 83 to 90 of 1954-55. The appellant company-The Public Bus Service Mont--gomery-applied for a large number of permits on eight important routes like Montgomery-Lahore, Montgomery-- Multan, Montgomery-Suleimanke, Montgomery-Lyallpur. Montgomery-Pakpattan, etc. To the Regional Transport Authority Multan. All these applications were rejected vide their resolution No. 21 in the meeting held on 23rd and 24th July 1955. The main reason given for the rejection was that the appellant company is a family concern, members of which are already running other transport and goods services and that there were better claimants in case it was considered necessary in the public interest to increase transport facilities on these routes. The appellant's main contention before me has been that though the members of this new concern belong to the same family, other members of which are engaged in transport and goods service, that fact in itself should not constitute a bar against them from increasing their activities in case public demand for improving transport facilities on the various routes for which they had applied, did exist. In this connection I have also been referred to certain observations made by me in Rajput Bus and Transport Company v. R. T. A. Rawalpindi (P L D 1955 (Rev.) Pb. 5), I am afraid this argument which was given by me in that ruling has been misinterpreted, as the appellants do not constitute a new concern but if I might say so it is only old wine in new bottles. The majority of the appellants are already in the transport business and it was against the creation of monopolies in public utility undertakings that I have made the remarks referred to above. In this case the parties want to circumvent the general principle contained in the observation made by me by coming under a different name. In my opinion the decision which the R. T. A. Have arrived at is in accord with public policy and the appeals stand rejected. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem