EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark Rana Muhammad Aslam Khan vs District Officer (Revenue), Etc. Writ Petition No. 31-R of 2008 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: Rana Muhammad Aslam Khan Respondant: District Officer (Revenue), Etc. Result: N/A Judgment Date: 2009-07-14 Court: Board of Revenue, Punjab Judges: Ch. Naeem Muhammad A. Saeed Citations Advocates Statutes K.L.R. 2010 Revenue Cases 23 Judgment ORDER CH. NAEEM MASOOD, J. - Tersely the facts of the case as given in the writ petition, are that the petitioner purchased the plot in dispute on 15.1.1968 through auction, which was confirmed on 2.2.1968, through auction and P.T.D, was issued in favour of petitioner on 31.12.1968. That the petitioner, after 35 years, approached respondent No. 1 for entering mutation, and as respondent No. 1 had failed to do his duty, therefore, directions have been sought to be issued to him for entering the mutation in consequence of the P.T.D, issued in favour of the petitioner. 2. A report was called for from the respondents, which has been submitted, operative part of which reads under:- "After the exchange of State land with that of land owned by the Central Government on 3.1.1958, the land for which the petitioner wants a mutation in his name in the Revenue Record was also given to Provincial Government and the Settlement Department was not authorized to issue any document of title whatsoever, after the exchange date i. e. 3.1.1958. Now the Provincial Government in Colonies Department, Board of Revenue, Punjab, Lahore has the power to deal with the matters of State land. The petitioner has already availed the remedy from the Civil Court at Faisalabad with regard to the same matter in issue by instituting, the civil suit and withdrawing the same on 18.7.2007. Since the petitioner has availed and exhausted a remedy from the Civil Court, he cannot avail the same from the different forum. The writ petition merits dismissal. The answering respondent is not empowered under settlement laws to resolve the issues of such nature while the Member, Judicial-Ill, Board, of Revenue, Punjab, Lahore has the powers to deal with the matters under settlement laws." 3. Arguments advanced by learned counsel for the petitioner as welt as learned Assistant Advocate- General, have been heard. Relevant record perused. 4. The writ petition is not tenable for the following reasons:- (i) 1t totally suffers from laches i.e., a dead matter v of 1968 is prayed to be made alive after 35 years. (ii) The petitioner had already approached, the Civil Court for the redressal of his grievance, and the civil suit filed by him was withdrawn, therefore, he is debarred from filing the present writ petition. (iii) The exchange of land on 3.1.1958, in thousands of acres, had since vested in the Province of Punjab, the said ' land was transferred to the Provincial Government with the approval of the Central Government and it had gone out of Compensation Pool and was not available for allotment. When the said land was not part of the compensation pool and it ceased to be an evacuee land, the Settlement Authorities had not powers to deal with it, therefore, the auction of the Settlement Authorities, if any, cannot be valid, legal and within the jurisdiction. The land when ceased to be evacuee property, even if, dealt with by the Settlement Authorities, was of no Jegat consequence. 5. Ln sequel thereof, the instant writ petition has no merit, which is accordingly dismissed. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue, Punjab Judge(s): Ch. Naeem Muhammad A. Saeed Title: Rana Muhammad Aslam Khan vs District Officer (Revenue), Etc. Case No.: Writ Petition No. 31-R of 2008 Date of Judgment: 2009-07-14 Reported As: K.L.R. 2010 Revenue Cases 23 Result: N/A Judgment ORDER CH. NAEEM MASOOD, J. - Tersely the facts of the case as given in the writ petition, are that the petitioner purchased the plot in dispute on 15.1.1968 through auction, which was confirmed on 2.2.1968, through auction and P.T.D, was issued in favour of petitioner on 31.12.1968. That the petitioner, after 35 years, approached respondent No. 1 for entering mutation, and as respondent No. 1 had failed to do his duty, therefore, directions have been sought to be issued to him for entering the mutation in consequence of the P.T.D, issued in favour of the petitioner. 2. A report was called for from the respondents, which has been submitted, operative part of which reads under:- "After the exchange of State land with that of land owned by the Central Government on 3.1.1958, the land for which the petitioner wants a mutation in his name in the Revenue Record was also given to Provincial Government and the Settlement Department was not authorized to issue any document of title whatsoever, after the exchange date i. e. 3.1.1958. Now the Provincial Government in Colonies Department, Board of Revenue, Punjab, Lahore has the power to deal with the matters of State land. The petitioner has already availed the remedy from the Civil Court at Faisalabad with regard to the same matter in issue by instituting, the civil suit and withdrawing the same on 18.7.2007. Since the petitioner has availed and exhausted a remedy from the Civil Court, he cannot avail the same from the different forum. The writ petition merits dismissal. The answering respondent is not empowered under settlement laws to resolve the issues of such nature while the Member, Judicial-Ill, Board, of Revenue, Punjab, Lahore has the powers to deal with the matters under settlement laws." 3. Arguments advanced by learned counsel for the petitioner as welt as learned Assistant Advocate- General, have been heard. Relevant record perused. 4. The writ petition is not tenable for the following reasons:- (i) 1t totally suffers from laches i.e., a dead matter v of 1968 is prayed to be made alive after 35 years. (ii) The petitioner had already approached, the Civil Court for the redressal of his grievance, and the civil suit filed by him was withdrawn, therefore, he is debarred from filing the present writ petition. (iii) The exchange of land on 3.1.1958, in thousands of acres, had since vested in the Province of Punjab, the said ' land was transferred to the Provincial Government with the approval of the Central Government and it had gone out of Compensation Pool and was not available for allotment. When the said land was not part of the compensation pool and it ceased to be an evacuee land, the Settlement Authorities had not powers to deal with it, therefore, the auction of the Settlement Authorities, if any, cannot be valid, legal and within the jurisdiction. The land when ceased to be evacuee property, even if, dealt with by the Settlement Authorities, was of no Jegat consequence. 5. Ln sequel thereof, the instant writ petition has no merit, which is accordingly dismissed. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem