EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark REHMAT KHAN vs KHUSHI MUHAMMAD AND ANOTHER R. 0. Appeal No, 30 of 1985 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: REHMAT KHAN Respondant: KHUSHI MUHAMMAD AND ANOTHER Result: Appeal accepted Judgment Date: 1986-02-24 Court: Board of Revenue, Punjab Judges: Maqbool Ahmad Sheikh Citations Advocates Statutes P L D 1986 Rev. 69 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' On the death of Zain Khan Lambardar of Chak No, 97/W.B., Tehsil Vehari, the A.C./Collector, Vehari appointed the appellant Rehmat Khan as successor Lambardar on ground that -Rehmat Khan is not the only son of deceased Lambardar but also belongs to the majority community. He is the owner of 12i Acres whereas his rival candidate owns 8 Acres". The orders of the learned A.C./Collector were, however, set aside by the learned Commissioner, Multan and the case remanded for fresh determination on ground that the chak was chiefly owned by the State and the appointment of Lambardar was to be made under rule 19(1) of the Land Revenue Rules. The appellant Rehmat Khan has come up in appeal against the orders of the learned Commissioner, dated 2-6-1985. 2. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties. The learned counsel for the appellant Rehmat Khan has tendered statement verified by the Tehsildar, Vehari according to which 952 Acres out of total area of 1155 Acres is under proprietary holding. It is also established by the Court orders produced by the learned counsel for the appellant that the previous incumbent Zain Khan. Was a permanent Lambardar of this Chak. The case of the appellant is resisted by the learned counsel for the respondent on ground that the remand order of the learned Commissioner should not be set aside in appeal. 3. In consideration of the fact that the Chak is mostly with the proprietors and the last incumbent was a permanent Lambardar, I would accept the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that Rehmat Khan has prior claim for appointment on grounds of primogeniture With these considerations in view, I would accept the appeal, set aside the orders of the learned Commissioner and appoint Rehmat Khan as Lambardar of Chak No, 97/W.B, www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue, Punjab Judge(s): Maqbool Ahmad Sheikh Title: REHMAT KHAN vs KHUSHI MUHAMMAD AND ANOTHER Case No.: R. 0. Appeal No, 30 of 1985 Date of Judgment: 1986-02-24 Reported As: P L D 1986 Rev. 69 Result: Appeal accepted Judgment ORDER ' On the death of Zain Khan Lambardar of Chak No, 97/W.B., Tehsil Vehari, the A.C./Collector, Vehari appointed the appellant Rehmat Khan as successor Lambardar on ground that -Rehmat Khan is not the only son of deceased Lambardar but also belongs to the majority community. He is the owner of 12i Acres whereas his rival candidate owns 8 Acres". The orders of the learned A.C./Collector were, however, set aside by the learned Commissioner, Multan and the case remanded for fresh determination on ground that the chak was chiefly owned by the State and the appointment of Lambardar was to be made under rule 19(1) of the Land Revenue Rules. The appellant Rehmat Khan has come up in appeal against the orders of the learned Commissioner, dated 2-6-1985. 2. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties. The learned counsel for the appellant Rehmat Khan has tendered statement verified by the Tehsildar, Vehari according to which 952 Acres out of total area of 1155 Acres is under proprietary holding. It is also established by the Court orders produced by the learned counsel for the appellant that the previous incumbent Zain Khan. Was a permanent Lambardar of this Chak. The case of the appellant is resisted by the learned counsel for the respondent on ground that the remand order of the learned Commissioner should not be set aside in appeal. 3. In consideration of the fact that the Chak is mostly with the proprietors and the last incumbent was a permanent Lambardar, I would accept the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that Rehmat Khan has prior claim for appointment on grounds of primogeniture With these considerations in view, I would accept the appeal, set aside the orders of the learned Commissioner and appoint Rehmat Khan as Lambardar of Chak No, 97/W.B, Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem