EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark RIAZUL HASNAIN vs PUNJAB PROVINCE Case No. 203 of 1974 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 3 Appeallant: RIAZUL HASNAIN Respondant: PUNJAB PROVINCE Result: order is made Judgment Date: 1975-08-30 Court: Administrative Tribunal Judges: Khalid Farooq Akbar Saad Saeed Jan Asfhaq Ali Khan Citations Advocates Statutes 1976 P L C [C. S. T.] 28(2) Judgment ORDER SAAD SAOOD JAN (CHAIRMAN) .-The appellant has challenged the correctness of his date of retirement as appearing in his service record maintained by the P.I. Administration. So far no order of his retirement has been made. In case, such an order is made, it would be open to the appellant to prefer an appeal against it as provided by subsection (2) of section 20, Civil Servants Act. It is only after the appellant has availed of this right that he can approach the Tribunal (see paragraph (a) of the proviso to section 4, Administrative Tribunals Act). This appeal is thus premature and is liable to be dismissed on that account. The appellant's main grievance is that although he has been representing against the incorrect entry with respect to his date of birth in his service record taken in this regard. This is indeed since 1941, yet no final decision has bee a very unsatisfactory state of affairs. His representation should be decided by a very early date. For the reasons stated above, we dismiss this appeal in limine. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Administrative Tribunal Judge(s): Khalid Farooq Akbar, Saad Saeed Jan, Asfhaq Ali Khan Title: RIAZUL HASNAIN vs PUNJAB PROVINCE Case No.: Case No. 203 of 1974 Date of Judgment: 1975-08-30 Reported As: 1976 P L C [C. S. T.] 28(2) Result: order is made Judgment ORDER SAAD SAOOD JAN (CHAIRMAN) .-The appellant has challenged the correctness of his date of retirement as appearing in his service record maintained by the P.I. Administration. So far no order of his retirement has been made. In case, such an order is made, it would be open to the appellant to prefer an appeal against it as provided by subsection (2) of section 20, Civil Servants Act. It is only after the appellant has availed of this right that he can approach the Tribunal (see paragraph (a) of the proviso to section 4, Administrative Tribunals Act). This appeal is thus premature and is liable to be dismissed on that account. The appellant's main grievance is that although he has been representing against the incorrect entry with respect to his date of birth in his service record taken in this regard. This is indeed since 1941, yet no final decision has bee a very unsatisfactory state of affairs. His representation should be decided by a very early date. For the reasons stated above, we dismiss this appeal in limine. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem