EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark ROSHAN AND OTHERS vs RABIA BIB! AND OTHERS R. 0. R. No, 801 of 1985 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: ROSHAN AND OTHERS Respondant: RABIA BIB! AND OTHERS Result: Revision dismissed Judgment Date: 1985-10-09 Court: Board of Revenue, Punjab Judges: Muhammad Saeedul Hassan Citations Advocates Statutes P L D 1986 Rev. 32 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' This is a revision petition filed under section 13 of the Consolidation of Holdings Ordinance 1960, against the order dated 31-1-1985 of the Additional Commissioner (Cons.), Gujranwala, whereby the appeal filed by the petitioners was dismissed. 2; This revision petition was dismissed in default on 21-5-1980. I have heard the arguments of the counsel for the petitioners for restoration of the case. After hearing the counsel for the petitioners the case is hereby restored. 3. The learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that Killa Nos. 1. 2, 8, 9 and 10 of Sq. No, 243 were previously owned and possessed by the petitioners. After consolidation these Khasra numbers were illegally given to the father of the present respondents who had no concern over this land. He has further argued that the respondents had filed time-barred, counter-appeal before the Collector (Cons.) in order to achieve rest of the petitioner's good land Bearing KiIla Nos. 11, 12 13, 19 and 20 of Sq. No, 243. The learned counsel has also argued that the orders of the Courts below are illegal and liable to be set aside. 4. I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioners and have gone through record of the case. 5. The perusal of the record shows that the Collector (Cons.) h merely remanded the case to the Consolidation Officer for spot visit and to bring the parties over a mutual compromise or otherwise the Con solidation Officer was directed to submit his proposals for consideration of the Collector (Cons.). It is obvious that the order of the Collector (Cons.) is not final. The case was remanded for fresh consideration to the Consolidation Officer. The petitioners have full rights to present their view point before him to watch their interest there The learned Additional Commissioner (Cons.) has rightly dismissed the appeal of the petitioners. 6. In view of the above I see no reason to interfere with the impugned order. The revision petition is dismissed. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue, Punjab Judge(s): Muhammad Saeedul Hassan Title: ROSHAN AND OTHERS vs RABIA BIB! AND OTHERS Case No.: R. 0. R. No, 801 of 1985 Date of Judgment: 1985-10-09 Reported As: P L D 1986 Rev. 32 Result: Revision dismissed Judgment ORDER ' This is a revision petition filed under section 13 of the Consolidation of Holdings Ordinance 1960, against the order dated 31-1-1985 of the Additional Commissioner (Cons.), Gujranwala, whereby the appeal filed by the petitioners was dismissed. 2; This revision petition was dismissed in default on 21-5-1980. I have heard the arguments of the counsel for the petitioners for restoration of the case. After hearing the counsel for the petitioners the case is hereby restored. 3. The learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that Killa Nos. 1. 2, 8, 9 and 10 of Sq. No, 243 were previously owned and possessed by the petitioners. After consolidation these Khasra numbers were illegally given to the father of the present respondents who had no concern over this land. He has further argued that the respondents had filed time-barred, counter-appeal before the Collector (Cons.) in order to achieve rest of the petitioner's good land Bearing KiIla Nos. 11, 12 13, 19 and 20 of Sq. No, 243. The learned counsel has also argued that the orders of the Courts below are illegal and liable to be set aside. 4. I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioners and have gone through record of the case. 5. The perusal of the record shows that the Collector (Cons.) h merely remanded the case to the Consolidation Officer for spot visit and to bring the parties over a mutual compromise or otherwise the Con solidation Officer was directed to submit his proposals for consideration of the Collector (Cons.). It is obvious that the order of the Collector (Cons.) is not final. The case was remanded for fresh consideration to the Consolidation Officer. The petitioners have full rights to present their view point before him to watch their interest there The learned Additional Commissioner (Cons.) has rightly dismissed the appeal of the petitioners. 6. In view of the above I see no reason to interfere with the impugned order. The revision petition is dismissed. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem