EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark SAEED MUHAMMAD KHAN vs UNIVERSITY OF BALUCHISTAN AND 4 OTHERS Appeal No, 20 of 1977 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 1 Coram 3 Appeallant: SAEED MUHAMMAD KHAN Respondant: UNIVERSITY OF BALUCHISTAN AND 4 OTHERS Result: Objection over ruled. Judgment Date: 1978-02-05 Court: Balochistan High Court Judges: Fakhruddin H. Shaikh Malik Abdus Samad Malik Habibullah Khan Citations Advocates Statutes 1978 P L C (C. S. T.) 55 Judgment Excerpt Judgment ORDER ' FAKHRUDDIN H. SHAIKH (CHAIRMAN).- Heard Mr. Jamil Khan Sherwani for the appellant and Mohammad Raisani, for the respondents on the preliminary objection that a University Employee is not a civil servant and as such the appeal Is not maintainable. ' Subsection (3) of section 3 of the Baluchistan University Ordinance, 1972 provides that the University shall be a body corporate. Such body has been held by the Supreme Court in P L D 1965 S C 90 as statutory body constituted by the Government In connection with the affairs of the Province. This would naturally haply that an employee of the University is a pet engaged in connection with the affairs of the Province. He will therefor fall within the definition of a "civil servant" as provided in section 2(a of the Baluchistan Civil Services Tribunal Act. The Tribunal has jurisdiction to entertain appeals in respect of all matters relating to terms and conditions of service of civil servants of the Province under section 3 of the Baluchistan Civil Servants Act. We are therefore of the view that this Tribunal has jurisdiction to entertain this appeal as it has been filed by a civil servant. The preliminary objection is therefore disallowed. Objection over ruled. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Balochistan High Court Judge(s): Fakhruddin H. Shaikh, Malik Abdus Samad, Malik Habibullah Khan Title: SAEED MUHAMMAD KHAN vs UNIVERSITY OF BALUCHISTAN AND 4 OTHERS Case No.: Appeal No, 20 of 1977 Date of Judgment: 1978-02-05 Reported As: 1978 P L C (C. S. T.) 55 Result: Objection over ruled. Judgment ORDER ' FAKHRUDDIN H. SHAIKH (CHAIRMAN).- Heard Mr. Jamil Khan Sherwani for the appellant and Mohammad Raisani, for the respondents on the preliminary objection that a University Employee is not a civil servant and as such the appeal Is not maintainable. ' Subsection (3) of section 3 of the Baluchistan University Ordinance, 1972 provides that the University shall be a body corporate. Such body has been held by the Supreme Court in P L D 1965 S C 90 as statutory body constituted by the Government In connection with the affairs of the Province. This would naturally haply that an employee of the University is a pet engaged in connection with the affairs of the Province. He will therefor fall within the definition of a "civil servant" as provided in section 2(a of the Baluchistan Civil Services Tribunal Act. The Tribunal has jurisdiction to entertain appeals in respect of all matters relating to terms and conditions of service of civil servants of the Province under section 3 of the Baluchistan Civil Servants Act. We are therefore of the view that this Tribunal has jurisdiction to entertain this appeal as it has been filed by a civil servant. The preliminary objection is therefore disallowed. Objection over ruled. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem