EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark SALEEM CHAUDHRY TEXTILE MILLS (PVT.) LTD. vs FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN And Other Civil Petitions for Leave to Appeal Nos.1225-L to 1227-L of 1996Writ Petitions Nos.5181, 5182 and 5841 of 1996 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 3 Appeallant: SALEEM CHAUDHRY TEXTILE MILLS (PVT.) LTD. Respondant: FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN And Other Result: Leave granted Judgment Date: 1997-04-21 Court: Supreme Court of Pakistan Judges: Fazal Karim Muhammad Ilyas Saad Saood Jan Author Citations Advocates Statutes 1997 S C M R 1415 Judgment ORDER SAAD SAOOD JAN, J. ---Leave to appeal has already been granted in Civil Petitions Nos.349 to 363-L of 1995 and others to consider the same questions of law as arise in these petitions For that reason leave is also granted in these petitions. All the appeals should be heard together after notice to the Attorney-General. 2. During the pendency of the appeals if the appellants undertake that they shall pay the tax as levied or leviable under sections 80-C, 80-CC and 80-D of the Income Tax Ordinance, with interest at the rate of 2% over the Bank rate in the event the appeals are dismissed, the recovery of the tax shall remain suspended. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Supreme Court of Pakistan Judge(s): Fazal Karim, Muhammad Ilyas, Saad Saood Jan Title: SALEEM CHAUDHRY TEXTILE MILLS (PVT.) LTD. vs FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN And Other Case No.: Civil Petitions for Leave to Appeal Nos.1225-L to 1227-L of 1996Writ Petitions Nos.5181, 5182 and 5841 of 1996 Date of Judgment: 1997-04-21 Reported As: 1997 S C M R 1415 Result: Leave granted Judgment ORDER SAAD SAOOD JAN, J. ---Leave to appeal has already been granted in Civil Petitions Nos.349 to 363-L of 1995 and others to consider the same questions of law as arise in these petitions For that reason leave is also granted in these petitions. All the appeals should be heard together after notice to the Attorney-General. 2. During the pendency of the appeals if the appellants undertake that they shall pay the tax as levied or leviable under sections 80-C, 80-CC and 80-D of the Income Tax Ordinance, with interest at the rate of 2% over the Bank rate in the event the appeals are dismissed, the recovery of the tax shall remain suspended. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-14 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem