EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark Sardar MUHAMMAD RAFIQUE KHAN vs AZAD GOVERNMENT OF THE STATE OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR and 2 others Service Appeal No,.499 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: Sardar MUHAMMAD RAFIQUE KHAN Respondant: AZAD GOVERNMENT OF THE STATE OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR and 2 others Result: Appeal allowed Judgment Date: 1992-01-16 Court: Azad Jammu and Kashmir Service Tribunal Judges: Sardar Muhammad Sajawal Khan Raja Muhammad Ashraf Kayani Citations Advocates Statutes 1992 P L C (C.S.) 868 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT ' SARDAR MUHAMMAD SAJAWAL KHAN (CHAIRMAN).---The instant appeal is directed against the order dated 29-10-1989 of Deputy Inspector-General of Police, Azad Government, Muzaffarabad by which the appellant was refused his pay for the period from 30-11-1985 to 4-4-1989 and the entire period of his absence from duty was ordered to be treated as leave without pay. The appeal is also directed against the order of Inspector-General of Police dated 25-4-1990 passed on appeal brought before him against the first impugned order. 2. The relevant facts of the case as are contained in the memo of appeal are that, the appellant was compulsorily retired from service by order dated 30-11-1985 of Deputy Inspector-General of Police Azad Kashmir Government, Muzaffarabad but on appeal before this forum the said order of compulsorily retirement was quashed and a fresh inquiry under Police Rules was ordered if found necessary by the Police Department. A fresh inquiry was initiated against the appellant and the Superintendent of Police, Rawalakot was appointed as Inquiry Officer. The Inquiry Officer summoned the complainant for making his statement before him in support of his previous allegations brought against the appellant. The complainant appeared before the Inquiry Officer and resiled from his original statement that he had made against the appellant before the previous Inquiry Officer. Thus the appellant was honourably acquitted but under the impugned order the entire period of this suspension and spent on compulsorily retirement was treated to be counted as leave without pay. Feeling dissatisfied with the above order of Deputy Inspector-General of Police, the appellant brought an appeal before the Inspector-General of Police (respondent No,2), but his appeal was also dismissed and by way of last resort the appellant brought second appeal for invoking the jurisdiction of this Tribunal under section 4 of Service Tribunal Act, 1975. The grounds taken in this appeal are that:- (a) That an accused civil servant/Police servant is presumed to be an innocent unless charges brought against him are proved and he is punished by the competent authority. The presumption adopted by the authority that the complainant was won over by the appellant and as such he must not be allowed his salary for the period of his absence from duty does not have any legal consequences so far as merits of the present appeal are concerned. At the same time the payment of any amount of pension to the appellant does not deprive him from the payment of the salary for the period the appellant remained under suspension and illegal retirement. (b) that the impugned orders are not warranted by any rule of law and the appellant has suffered a great loss for having been illegally thrown out of service for period of four years. (c) that his appeal before Inspector-General of Police was not considered properly and the impugned order was made telegraphically without applying the relevant procedure prescribed for the disposal of appeal. (d) that the impugned orders have been made in violation of terms and conditions of service of the appellant. 3. It is prayed by the appellant that the impugned orders being contrary to the law and facts may be set aside and he may be held entitle to receive his pay for the period he remained under suspension and illegal retirement. 4. By a short order of this Tribunal dated 6-8-1990 the appeal was admitted for regular hearing and the respondents were asked to file their written objections, if any. As many as fourteen adjournments were granted to the respondents for objections but they could not bring their objections before this forum and ultimately their right of defence had to be closed. 5. We have heard the arguments as were addressed at the Bar by the learned counsel for the appellant. We have also gone through the impugned order which is made by the Inspector-General of Police. The reasons recorded by DIG of Police for the first impugned order are that the allegations brought against the appellant were proved beyond any doubt during the course of first inquiry held previously, the witnesses were won over by the appellant in the fresh inquiry ordered against the appellant and hence the appellant was not entitled to any salary for the period he had remained under suspension and compulsory retirement. We are afraid we cannot contribute to this view that since the appellant was found guilty in the previous inquiry he must also suffer some punishment even if the person making the original allegations has resiled from his original statement. It seems essential that a reference may be made to section 16 of AJ&K Civil Servants Act, 1976 and the same is reproduced below:- "16. Pay.-- A civil servant appointed to a post or grade shall be entitled in accordance with the rules, to the pay sanctioned for such post or grade: ' Provided that when the appointment is made on a current, acting or additional charge basis, his pay shall be fixed in the prescribed manner: Provided further that where a civil servant has been dismissed or removed from service or reduced in rank, he shall, in the event of the order of dismissal, removal from service or reduction in rank being set aside, be entitled to such arrears or pay as the authority setting aside the order may determine? ' The above rule of law makes it abundantly clear that a civil servant can only be refused his salary if he has received the punishment of dismissal or removal from service or reduction in rank for the charges brought against him and not otherwise. It is, no doubt, that all disciplinary actions against the subordinate members of the Police service arc taken under AJ&K Police Rules but at the same time the provisions of Civil Servants Act are also applicable to all the members of the Police service. Therefore, it shall have to be accepted that both a civil servant and a police servant cannot be refused the payment of their salaries for any period during which they are charge-sheeted and placed under inquiry for proving charges brought against them. In the instant case no charge has been proved against the appellant in the second inquiry held against him and as such the payment of salary for the period the appellant remained under suspension and illegal retirement cannot be withheld by way of a I B penalty. 6. For the above reasons, we feel ourselves inclined to allow this appeal. After setting aside the impugned order, the appellant's period of suspension as well as that of illegal retirement shall be treated as duty and he shall be paid all his emoluments after deducting the amount of pension that he has already received from the Government exchequer during that period. No order as to the costs. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Azad Jammu and Kashmir Service Tribunal Judge(s): Sardar Muhammad Sajawal Khan, Raja Muhammad Ashraf Kayani Title: Sardar MUHAMMAD RAFIQUE KHAN vs AZAD GOVERNMENT OF THE STATE OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR and 2 others Case No.: Service Appeal No,.499 Date of Judgment: 1992-01-16 Reported As: 1992 P L C (C.S.) 868 Result: Appeal allowed Judgment JUDGMENT ' SARDAR MUHAMMAD SAJAWAL KHAN (CHAIRMAN).---The instant appeal is directed against the order dated 29-10-1989 of Deputy Inspector-General of Police, Azad Government, Muzaffarabad by which the appellant was refused his pay for the period from 30-11-1985 to 4-4-1989 and the entire period of his absence from duty was ordered to be treated as leave without pay. The appeal is also directed against the order of Inspector-General of Police dated 25-4-1990 passed on appeal brought before him against the first impugned order. 2. The relevant facts of the case as are contained in the memo of appeal are that, the appellant was compulsorily retired from service by order dated 30-11-1985 of Deputy Inspector-General of Police Azad Kashmir Government, Muzaffarabad but on appeal before this forum the said order of compulsorily retirement was quashed and a fresh inquiry under Police Rules was ordered if found necessary by the Police Department. A fresh inquiry was initiated against the appellant and the Superintendent of Police, Rawalakot was appointed as Inquiry Officer. The Inquiry Officer summoned the complainant for making his statement before him in support of his previous allegations brought against the appellant. The complainant appeared before the Inquiry Officer and resiled from his original statement that he had made against the appellant before the previous Inquiry Officer. Thus the appellant was honourably acquitted but under the impugned order the entire period of this suspension and spent on compulsorily retirement was treated to be counted as leave without pay. Feeling dissatisfied with the above order of Deputy Inspector-General of Police, the appellant brought an appeal before the Inspector-General of Police (respondent No,2), but his appeal was also dismissed and by way of last resort the appellant brought second appeal for invoking the jurisdiction of this Tribunal under section 4 of Service Tribunal Act, 1975. The grounds taken in this appeal are that:- (a) That an accused civil servant/Police servant is presumed to be an innocent unless charges brought against him are proved and he is punished by the competent authority. The presumption adopted by the authority that the complainant was won over by the appellant and as such he must not be allowed his salary for the period of his absence from duty does not have any legal consequences so far as merits of the present appeal are concerned. At the same time the payment of any amount of pension to the appellant does not deprive him from the payment of the salary for the period the appellant remained under suspension and illegal retirement. (b) that the impugned orders are not warranted by any rule of law and the appellant has suffered a great loss for having been illegally thrown out of service for period of four years. (c) that his appeal before Inspector-General of Police was not considered properly and the impugned order was made telegraphically without applying the relevant procedure prescribed for the disposal of appeal. (d) that the impugned orders have been made in violation of terms and conditions of service of the appellant. 3. It is prayed by the appellant that the impugned orders being contrary to the law and facts may be set aside and he may be held entitle to receive his pay for the period he remained under suspension and illegal retirement. 4. By a short order of this Tribunal dated 6-8-1990 the appeal was admitted for regular hearing and the respondents were asked to file their written objections, if any. As many as fourteen adjournments were granted to the respondents for objections but they could not bring their objections before this forum and ultimately their right of defence had to be closed. 5. We have heard the arguments as were addressed at the Bar by the learned counsel for the appellant. We have also gone through the impugned order which is made by the Inspector-General of Police. The reasons recorded by DIG of Police for the first impugned order are that the allegations brought against the appellant were proved beyond any doubt during the course of first inquiry held previously, the witnesses were won over by the appellant in the fresh inquiry ordered against the appellant and hence the appellant was not entitled to any salary for the period he had remained under suspension and compulsory retirement. We are afraid we cannot contribute to this view that since the appellant was found guilty in the previous inquiry he must also suffer some punishment even if the person making the original allegations has resiled from his original statement. It seems essential that a reference may be made to section 16 of AJ&K Civil Servants Act, 1976 and the same is reproduced below:- "16. Pay.-- A civil servant appointed to a post or grade shall be entitled in accordance with the rules, to the pay sanctioned for such post or grade: ' Provided that when the appointment is made on a current, acting or additional charge basis, his pay shall be fixed in the prescribed manner: Provided further that where a civil servant has been dismissed or removed from service or reduced in rank, he shall, in the event of the order of dismissal, removal from service or reduction in rank being set aside, be entitled to such arrears or pay as the authority setting aside the order may determine? ' The above rule of law makes it abundantly clear that a civil servant can only be refused his salary if he has received the punishment of dismissal or removal from service or reduction in rank for the charges brought against him and not otherwise. It is, no doubt, that all disciplinary actions against the subordinate members of the Police service arc taken under AJ&K Police Rules but at the same time the provisions of Civil Servants Act are also applicable to all the members of the Police service. Therefore, it shall have to be accepted that both a civil servant and a police servant cannot be refused the payment of their salaries for any period during which they are charge-sheeted and placed under inquiry for proving charges brought against them. In the instant case no charge has been proved against the appellant in the second inquiry held against him and as such the payment of salary for the period the appellant remained under suspension and illegal retirement cannot be withheld by way of a I B penalty. 6. For the above reasons, we feel ourselves inclined to allow this appeal. After setting aside the impugned order, the appellant's period of suspension as well as that of illegal retirement shall be treated as duty and he shall be paid all his emoluments after deducting the amount of pension that he has already received from the Government exchequer during that period. No order as to the costs. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem