EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark SHAH MUHAMMAD KHAN vs GHULAM QADIR ETC. Civil Revision No, 323 of 1964/BWP Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 1 Coram 1 Appeallant: SHAH MUHAMMAD KHAN Respondant: GHULAM QADIR ETC. Result: Petition dismissed Judgment Date: 1969-10-07 Court: Baghdad-ul-Jadid Judges: Muhammad Afzal Cheema Citations Advocates Statutes P L D 1971 Baghdad-ul-Jadid 9 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT The simple facts giving rise to this Civil Revision, which has been unnecessarily delayed for more than five years, are that one Mian Allah Bakhsh, a land-owner of Mauza Behram Shah, District Bahawalnagar, had surrendered a portion of his land under Martial Law Regulation 64. One of his sons, Ghulam Qadir plaintiff-respondent, claimed one-half of the compensation to be awarded in lieu of the land so surrendered on the ground that half of it had been gifted to him by his father. He brought a suit for declaration on 15-1-1963. The written-statement was filed by the present petitioner on 13th of April 1963 and issues were struck on 21-6-1963. About four months later, the defendant-petitioner filed an application seeking amendment of the written-statement which was allowed on 17-10-63 resulting in the framing of two additional issues raising for the first time the question of jurisdiction of the trial Court to try the case. These issues were framed on the 23rd of November 1963. Having scored this point it was not till seven months thereafter when the plaintiff-respondent had closed his case that on 19-6-1964 the defendant-petitioner filed an application under Order XIV, rule 2 praying that the legal issues relating to the question of jurisdiction may be decided before proceeding with the rest of the case. After having heard the parties' counsel on the point, the learned trial Judge dismissed the petition vide his order dated 3-7-1964, giving rise to the present Civil Revision, which has been allowed to linger on being a short matter could have been readily disposed of. 2. Learned counsel for the petitioner, presumably being conscious of the fact that he is on a weak wicket, has half-heartedly referred me to the provisions contained in Order XIV, rule 2 and Order XV, rule 3. He has also referred me to Janki Das and another v. Kalu Ram and another 1 in support of his contention that in the circumstances of the case the learned trial Judge should have exercised his discretion in favour of the petitioner. 3. The point raised by the learned counsel is patently devoid of force. It is well-settled that it is discretionary with the trial Court to decide interlocutory matters and the discretion, if properly exercised, should not be interfered with by this Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction. In the above background of the case when after having already succeeded in considerably prolonging the matter the petitioner filed an application under Order XIV, rule 2 for the first time at a stage when the plaintiff-respondent had closed his case and the conclusion of the trial should not have taken more than a couple of hearings; it can hardly be said that it was not a case of proper exercise of discretion by the learned trial Judge. Rather, I am constrained to observe that if the petition had been allowed it would, in all probability, have been a case of an improper exercise of discretion in favour of the present petitioner. It need hardly be added that the correct legal position in this regard is well-settled in matters of this nature the Court is under no obligation to allow such B a prayer which also suffered from laches. Learned counsel for the respondent has referred me to Faqir Chand v. Mst. Bibi Zulekha 2 and Srit. Sarojini Roy and another v. Shivaram Poddar and others 3 . Having considered the authorities pressed into service by either side, I am in no manner of doubt that Janki Das and another v. Kalu Ram and another relied on by the learned counsel for the petitioner has no bearing, whatever, to the circumstances of this case. On the contrary, the autho¬rities cited by the learned counsel for the respondent apply with full force to the facts of this case. 4. The upshot of the discussion, therefore, is that petition fails and is hereby dismissed with costs. 1 A I R 1936 Pat. 250 2 P L D 1962 Pesh. 1 3 A I R 1957 Pat. 59 www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Baghdad-ul-Jadid Judge(s): Muhammad Afzal Cheema Title: SHAH MUHAMMAD KHAN vs GHULAM QADIR ETC. Case No.: Civil Revision No, 323 of 1964/BWP Date of Judgment: 1969-10-07 Reported As: P L D 1971 Baghdad-ul-Jadid 9 Result: Petition dismissed Judgment JUDGMENT The simple facts giving rise to this Civil Revision, which has been unnecessarily delayed for more than five years, are that one Mian Allah Bakhsh, a land-owner of Mauza Behram Shah, District Bahawalnagar, had surrendered a portion of his land under Martial Law Regulation 64. One of his sons, Ghulam Qadir plaintiff-respondent, claimed one-half of the compensation to be awarded in lieu of the land so surrendered on the ground that half of it had been gifted to him by his father. He brought a suit for declaration on 15-1-1963. The written-statement was filed by the present petitioner on 13th of April 1963 and issues were struck on 21-6-1963. About four months later, the defendant-petitioner filed an application seeking amendment of the written-statement which was allowed on 17-10-63 resulting in the framing of two additional issues raising for the first time the question of jurisdiction of the trial Court to try the case. These issues were framed on the 23rd of November 1963. Having scored this point it was not till seven months thereafter when the plaintiff-respondent had closed his case that on 19-6-1964 the defendant-petitioner filed an application under Order XIV, rule 2 praying that the legal issues relating to the question of jurisdiction may be decided before proceeding with the rest of the case. After having heard the parties' counsel on the point, the learned trial Judge dismissed the petition vide his order dated 3-7-1964, giving rise to the present Civil Revision, which has been allowed to linger on being a short matter could have been readily disposed of. 2. Learned counsel for the petitioner, presumably being conscious of the fact that he is on a weak wicket, has half-heartedly referred me to the provisions contained in Order XIV, rule 2 and Order XV, rule 3. He has also referred me to Janki Das and another v. Kalu Ram and another 1 in support of his contention that in the circumstances of the case the learned trial Judge should have exercised his discretion in favour of the petitioner. 3. The point raised by the learned counsel is patently devoid of force. It is well-settled that it is discretionary with the trial Court to decide interlocutory matters and the discretion, if properly exercised, should not be interfered with by this Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction. In the above background of the case when after having already succeeded in considerably prolonging the matter the petitioner filed an application under Order XIV, rule 2 for the first time at a stage when the plaintiff-respondent had closed his case and the conclusion of the trial should not have taken more than a couple of hearings; it can hardly be said that it was not a case of proper exercise of discretion by the learned trial Judge. Rather, I am constrained to observe that if the petition had been allowed it would, in all probability, have been a case of an improper exercise of discretion in favour of the present petitioner. It need hardly be added that the correct legal position in this regard is well-settled in matters of this nature the Court is under no obligation to allow such B a prayer which also suffered from laches. Learned counsel for the respondent has referred me to Faqir Chand v. Mst. Bibi Zulekha 2 and Srit. Sarojini Roy and another v. Shivaram Poddar and others 3 . Having considered the authorities pressed into service by either side, I am in no manner of doubt that Janki Das and another v. Kalu Ram and another relied on by the learned counsel for the petitioner has no bearing, whatever, to the circumstances of this case. On the contrary, the autho¬rities cited by the learned counsel for the respondent apply with full force to the facts of this case. 4. The upshot of the discussion, therefore, is that petition fails and is hereby dismissed with costs. 1 A I R 1936 Pat. 250 2 P L D 1962 Pesh. 1 3 A I R 1957 Pat. 59 Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-14 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem