EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark SHAH JEHAN vs DEPUTY INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF POLICE, QUETTA Service Appeal No, 39 of 1990 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 3 Appeallant: SHAH JEHAN Respondant: DEPUTY INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF POLICE, QUETTA Result: Appeal accepted Judgment Date: 1991-05-05 Court: Balochistan Service Tribunal Judges: Amir-ul-Mulk Mengal Rasheed-uz-Zafar Khan Barkat Ali Baloch Citations Advocates Statutes 1992 P L C (C.S.) 204 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT ' AMIRUL MULK MENGAL (CHAIRMAN).---This appeal is directed against the adverse remarks passed by Senior Superintendent of Police in Annual Confidential Report of the appellant with the following effect:-- 1. Class of Report. = 'C' 2. General Remarks. = Instead of improvement, he has rather deteriorated. 2. Facts giving rise to this appeal if, put succinctly are that appellant is a Sub Inspector presently posted in Gowalmandi Police Station, Quetta. In the year 1989 he received copy of adverse remarks vide memo No,350/CRC dated 11-2-1990. These adverse remarks have been given in the A.C.R. Of appellant for the period from 1-1-1989 to 23-7-1991 by the then Senior Superintendent of Police, Quetta. During the aforesaid period following was the working tenure of appellant:- "1-1-1989 to 28-6-1989. 5 months & 28 days in Police Station Satellite Town, Quetta. 6-2-1989 to 19-3-1989 One month & 10 days leave. 28-6-1989 upto the reporting period. Police Lines. ' Remaining working period in Police 4 months & 18 days." Station. ' It is the case of appellant that although he filed an appeal before the D.I.-G. Of Police Quetta Range through proper channel but he received no reply till the time of filing of appeal. Therefore, when the mandatory period elapsed, he approached this Tribunal through this appeal. 3. Heard Mr. M. Rafiq Ahmad, Advocate for the appellant and learned Advocate General Balochistan for respondent. 4. Learned Advocate-General at the very outset raised a preliminary objection contending that since the S.S.P. Who had passed adverse remarks has not been made a party, therefore, the appeal has not been competently filed and is liable to be rejected. The second legal objection in this regard was that since the respondent has rejected the appeal of the appellant and the said order has not been impugned, therefore, the appeal is also not maintainable on this score. 5. We do not find much substance in the aforesaid objections for the reasons that although the adverse remarks have been passed by the SSP but the DIG has also affirmed the same and thus the order passed by SSP has merged into appellate order and DIG has been made a party who has defended the appellant as is evident from the comments filed before us. As for impugning the appellate order, suffice it to observe that the appellant had the right to file an appeal before this Tribunal if his representation/appeal is not decided within three months, thus we do not see any force in the preliminary objection and would proceed to dispose of the appeal on merits. 6. The appellant has urged that during the period when the adverse remarks had been passed his performance was excellent for which he was recommended for commendation certificates by the authorities. The counsel invited our attention to the documents attached with the said effect particularly the SSP Police Quetta had written to the DIG Police Quetta Range Quetta for issuing a Commendation Certificate in favour of the present appellant on 22-2-1989. It was thus submitted that in view of such performance for which the SSP had already recommended for issuance of a commendation certificate to the appellant, passing of adverse remarks for the same period is not warranted. 7. Learned Advocate-General, Balochistan, however, submitted that in fact the performance during the aforesaid period was by a team of officers and that this Tribunal should be reluctant to interfere in the power and discretion of the authorities as otherwise this would tantamount to usurpation of the powers so vested and would result in causing chaos and indiscipline in the ranks. 8. We have taken into consideration the arguments so advanced and gone through the record. There is no cavil to the proposition that it is the exclusive domain of the concerned authorities to write the ACRs of their subordinates. Generally such authority should not be interfered with so that the subordinate officials should perform their duties diligently. But at the same time, if the performance of an officer is found not only satisfactory but much more than that passing of adverse remarks for the same period without any material to the contrary is a circumstance which should not be easily over looked. Indeed the SSP has recommended the present appellant for a commendation certificate Class II and at the same time without any material passing adverse remarks against the same officer for the same period is not justified in law. The DIG has attempted to support the adverse remarks by accepting the explanation given by the SSP in the following words:- "SI Shah khan has portrayed a rosy picture regarding his performance during the period under report. However, it is worth mentioning that it was a time when total burden of crime especially against property and explosive cases was being shared by the then S.D.P.Os. Mr. Rehmat Ullah Khan and thereafter Abdul Salam Khan. It was rather work of G.Os. And not this individual that led to the successful working of cases and recovery of motor vehicles which I remember were recovered from Jacob Abad District and also from the area surrounding Quetta City. While G.Os. Were busy in controlling the then crime wave, the individual was only interested in running his private show by way of indulging in unwanted activities". ' But it may be seen that even in these remarks there is nothing against the present appellant except that he was interested in running his private show by way of indulging in unwanted activities. "Unwanted activities" have never been explained neither in the comments nor substantiated through any evidence whatsoeverHad there been any material that the performance of the present appellant was shaky we would not have entertained his plea for expunction of remarks but we are not inclined to justify passing of adverse remarks without any material whatsoever in view of the fact that the official has been recommended during the same period for commendation letter. ' For the aforesaid reasons we are inclined to accept this appeal and as a result the adverse remarks referred to hereinabove are hereby ordered to be expunged from his A.C.R. We pass no orders as to costs. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Balochistan Service Tribunal Judge(s): Amir-ul-Mulk Mengal, Rasheed-uz-Zafar Khan, Barkat Ali Baloch Title: SHAH JEHAN vs DEPUTY INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF POLICE, QUETTA Case No.: Service Appeal No, 39 of 1990 Date of Judgment: 1991-05-05 Reported As: 1992 P L C (C.S.) 204 Result: Appeal accepted Judgment JUDGMENT ' AMIRUL MULK MENGAL (CHAIRMAN).---This appeal is directed against the adverse remarks passed by Senior Superintendent of Police in Annual Confidential Report of the appellant with the following effect:-- 1. Class of Report. = 'C' 2. General Remarks. = Instead of improvement, he has rather deteriorated. 2. Facts giving rise to this appeal if, put succinctly are that appellant is a Sub Inspector presently posted in Gowalmandi Police Station, Quetta. In the year 1989 he received copy of adverse remarks vide memo No,350/CRC dated 11-2-1990. These adverse remarks have been given in the A.C.R. Of appellant for the period from 1-1-1989 to 23-7-1991 by the then Senior Superintendent of Police, Quetta. During the aforesaid period following was the working tenure of appellant:- "1-1-1989 to 28-6-1989. 5 months & 28 days in Police Station Satellite Town, Quetta. 6-2-1989 to 19-3-1989 One month & 10 days leave. 28-6-1989 upto the reporting period. Police Lines. ' Remaining working period in Police 4 months & 18 days." Station. ' It is the case of appellant that although he filed an appeal before the D.I.-G. Of Police Quetta Range through proper channel but he received no reply till the time of filing of appeal. Therefore, when the mandatory period elapsed, he approached this Tribunal through this appeal. 3. Heard Mr. M. Rafiq Ahmad, Advocate for the appellant and learned Advocate General Balochistan for respondent. 4. Learned Advocate-General at the very outset raised a preliminary objection contending that since the S.S.P. Who had passed adverse remarks has not been made a party, therefore, the appeal has not been competently filed and is liable to be rejected. The second legal objection in this regard was that since the respondent has rejected the appeal of the appellant and the said order has not been impugned, therefore, the appeal is also not maintainable on this score. 5. We do not find much substance in the aforesaid objections for the reasons that although the adverse remarks have been passed by the SSP but the DIG has also affirmed the same and thus the order passed by SSP has merged into appellate order and DIG has been made a party who has defended the appellant as is evident from the comments filed before us. As for impugning the appellate order, suffice it to observe that the appellant had the right to file an appeal before this Tribunal if his representation/appeal is not decided within three months, thus we do not see any force in the preliminary objection and would proceed to dispose of the appeal on merits. 6. The appellant has urged that during the period when the adverse remarks had been passed his performance was excellent for which he was recommended for commendation certificates by the authorities. The counsel invited our attention to the documents attached with the said effect particularly the SSP Police Quetta had written to the DIG Police Quetta Range Quetta for issuing a Commendation Certificate in favour of the present appellant on 22-2-1989. It was thus submitted that in view of such performance for which the SSP had already recommended for issuance of a commendation certificate to the appellant, passing of adverse remarks for the same period is not warranted. 7. Learned Advocate-General, Balochistan, however, submitted that in fact the performance during the aforesaid period was by a team of officers and that this Tribunal should be reluctant to interfere in the power and discretion of the authorities as otherwise this would tantamount to usurpation of the powers so vested and would result in causing chaos and indiscipline in the ranks. 8. We have taken into consideration the arguments so advanced and gone through the record. There is no cavil to the proposition that it is the exclusive domain of the concerned authorities to write the ACRs of their subordinates. Generally such authority should not be interfered with so that the subordinate officials should perform their duties diligently. But at the same time, if the performance of an officer is found not only satisfactory but much more than that passing of adverse remarks for the same period without any material to the contrary is a circumstance which should not be easily over looked. Indeed the SSP has recommended the present appellant for a commendation certificate Class II and at the same time without any material passing adverse remarks against the same officer for the same period is not justified in law. The DIG has attempted to support the adverse remarks by accepting the explanation given by the SSP in the following words:- "SI Shah khan has portrayed a rosy picture regarding his performance during the period under report. However, it is worth mentioning that it was a time when total burden of crime especially against property and explosive cases was being shared by the then S.D.P.Os. Mr. Rehmat Ullah Khan and thereafter Abdul Salam Khan. It was rather work of G.Os. And not this individual that led to the successful working of cases and recovery of motor vehicles which I remember were recovered from Jacob Abad District and also from the area surrounding Quetta City. While G.Os. Were busy in controlling the then crime wave, the individual was only interested in running his private show by way of indulging in unwanted activities". ' But it may be seen that even in these remarks there is nothing against the present appellant except that he was interested in running his private show by way of indulging in unwanted activities. "Unwanted activities" have never been explained neither in the comments nor substantiated through any evidence whatsoeverHad there been any material that the performance of the present appellant was shaky we would not have entertained his plea for expunction of remarks but we are not inclined to justify passing of adverse remarks without any material whatsoever in view of the fact that the official has been recommended during the same period for commendation letter. ' For the aforesaid reasons we are inclined to accept this appeal and as a result the adverse remarks referred to hereinabove are hereby ordered to be expunged from his A.C.R. We pass no orders as to costs. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem