EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark Shri VIJA YALAKSHMI RICE MILL CONTRACTORS CO. vs COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX Income-tax Reference No. 171 of 1984 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: Shri VIJA YALAKSHMI RICE MILL CONTRACTORS CO. Respondant: COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX Result: Question answered in the affirmative Judgment Date: 1989-02-01 Court: Andhra Paradesh High Court Judges: B. P. Jeevan Reddy V. Neeladri Rao Citations Advocates Statutes 1990 P T D 552 Judgment JUDGMENT B.P. JEEVAN REDDY, J.-- The Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, Hyderabad, has referred the following question under Section 256(1) of the Income-tax Act, 1961: "Whether, on the facts and circumstances of the case, the Tribunal is justified in upholding the refusal of registration of the firm by the lower authorities?" The assessee filed a return in respect of the partnership firm, Shri Vijayalakshmi Rice Mill Contractors Co., Akividu, for the assessment year 1976--77 (accounting year ending on October 13, 1975). Along with the return, an application in Form No. 11 was filed seeking registration of the firm. The Income-tax Officer declined to register the firm on the ground that when called upon to produce the books of account, the assessee failed to produce the same on the plea that they were lost. He refused to accept that plea. On that basis, he held that there is no proof or material to know that profits were actually divided in a particular manner between the partners. So far as the assessment is concerned, the return filed by the assessee showed a loss of Rs. 2,46,230; the Income-tax Officer refused to accept the return and inasmuch as the assessee also failed to produce the books, he assessed the income at Rs. 20,000 to which the assessee agreed. No appeal was preferred against the order of assessment. Appeal was preferred only against the order refusing registration. In this appeal, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner agreed with the Income-tax Officer that the assessee had not satisfactorily explained the loss of books. He was of the opinion that in the absence of books, genuineness of the firm cannot be said to have been established. On further appeal, the Tribunal agreed with the reasoning of the first appellate Court. Thereupon, the assessee asked for and obtained this reference. Sri Y. Ratnakar, learned counsel for the assessee, submitted that along with the return, the assessee had filed copies of accounts showing distribution of profits and losses between the members. May be so. But the Income-tax Officer, evidently with a view to verify the correctness of the said figures, called upon the assessee to produce the account books. The assessee pleaded loss of books which was not accepted by the Income-tax Officer as a fact which means that he was entitled to draw an adverse inference against the assessee. Refusing the registration of the firm is a necessary consequence of the said finding. We do not see any error in the order of the Tribunal. It is not disputed before us that the registration could be refused if the firm failed to satisfy the Income-tax Officer that the profits and losses of the firm were apportioned between the partners in the manner specified in the partnership deed. For the above reasons, the question referred to is answered in the affirmative, that is, in favour of the Revenue and against the assessee. No costs. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Andhra Paradesh High Court Judge(s): B. P. Jeevan Reddy, V. Neeladri Rao Title: Shri VIJA YALAKSHMI RICE MILL CONTRACTORS CO. vs COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX Case No.: Income-tax Reference No. 171 of 1984 Date of Judgment: 1989-02-01 Reported As: 1990 P T D 552 Result: Question answered in the affirmative Judgment JUDGMENT B.P. JEEVAN REDDY, J.-- The Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, Hyderabad, has referred the following question under Section 256(1) of the Income-tax Act, 1961: "Whether, on the facts and circumstances of the case, the Tribunal is justified in upholding the refusal of registration of the firm by the lower authorities?" The assessee filed a return in respect of the partnership firm, Shri Vijayalakshmi Rice Mill Contractors Co., Akividu, for the assessment year 1976--77 (accounting year ending on October 13, 1975). Along with the return, an application in Form No. 11 was filed seeking registration of the firm. The Income-tax Officer declined to register the firm on the ground that when called upon to produce the books of account, the assessee failed to produce the same on the plea that they were lost. He refused to accept that plea. On that basis, he held that there is no proof or material to know that profits were actually divided in a particular manner between the partners. So far as the assessment is concerned, the return filed by the assessee showed a loss of Rs. 2,46,230; the Income-tax Officer refused to accept the return and inasmuch as the assessee also failed to produce the books, he assessed the income at Rs. 20,000 to which the assessee agreed. No appeal was preferred against the order of assessment. Appeal was preferred only against the order refusing registration. In this appeal, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner agreed with the Income-tax Officer that the assessee had not satisfactorily explained the loss of books. He was of the opinion that in the absence of books, genuineness of the firm cannot be said to have been established. On further appeal, the Tribunal agreed with the reasoning of the first appellate Court. Thereupon, the assessee asked for and obtained this reference. Sri Y. Ratnakar, learned counsel for the assessee, submitted that along with the return, the assessee had filed copies of accounts showing distribution of profits and losses between the members. May be so. But the Income-tax Officer, evidently with a view to verify the correctness of the said figures, called upon the assessee to produce the account books. The assessee pleaded loss of books which was not accepted by the Income-tax Officer as a fact which means that he was entitled to draw an adverse inference against the assessee. Refusing the registration of the firm is a necessary consequence of the said finding. We do not see any error in the order of the Tribunal. It is not disputed before us that the registration could be refused if the firm failed to satisfy the Income-tax Officer that the profits and losses of the firm were apportioned between the partners in the manner specified in the partnership deed. For the above reasons, the question referred to is answered in the affirmative, that is, in favour of the Revenue and against the assessee. No costs. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem