EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark Smt. MOHINDER KAUR vs INCOME TAX OFFICER and others Writ Petition No,718 of 1996 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 2 Appeallant: Smt. MOHINDER KAUR Respondant: INCOME TAX OFFICER and others Result: Petition allowed Judgment Date: 1996-10-17 Court: Allahabad High Court Judges: B. M. Lal B. K. Sharma Citations Advocates Statutes 1999 P T D 2751 Judgment JUDGMENT ' B.M. LAL, J.---Sri Shashi Kant Gupta for the petitioner and Sri Ashok Kumar, standing counsel for the respondents. They are heard. ' This petition was heard yesterday also, i,e,, on October 16, 1996, and orders were reserved but during the lunch hour Sri Shashi Kant Gupta appeared in Chambers to request that the writ petition be reheard as certain legal grounds could not be urged during the course of arguments. This persuaded this Court to place this petition for rehearing today. ' Having heard learned counsel for respective parties, the petition is being disposed of finally with their consent. ' By this petition, the petitioner Smt. Mohinder Kaur, wife of the late Sardar Saran Singh, seeks a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the proclamation of sale, dated September 9, 1996, and an order, dated September 17, 1996, passed by respondent No,2, the Tax Recovery Officer, Kanpur (contained in Annexures 8 and 9 to the writ petition respectively), whereby auction sale of the house of the late Sardar Saran Singh, bearing corporation No,113/14, located in Swamp Nagar, Kanpur, fixed on October 17, 1996, at "Aaykar Bhawan", Civil Lines, Kanpur, is adjourned to October 23, 1996. ' In a nutshell it is contended for the petitioner that the petitioner's husband the late Sardar Saran Singh, was a partner in Atma Singh Steel Rolling Mills, Kanpur, wherein Sardar Gurukukh Singh and others are also partners. During the search and seizure conducted in the year 1972 by the income-tax authorities at the business premises of the firm and at the residence of Sardar Gurmukh Singh and the late Sardar Saran Singh, certain books of account and a number of loose papers were seized wherein it is found that the business transactions of individual dealings of Sardar Gurmukh Singh for the assessment years 1970-71, 1971-72, 1972-73 and prior transactions were of the firm, Atma Singh Steel Rolling Mills, Kanpur, and the same appears to have not been disclosed in the return filed by them. Therefore, proceedings were initiated against the late Sardar Saran Singh and the firm, Atma Singh Steel Rolling Mills, Kanpur, which ultimately culminated into recovery proceedings of huge amounts against the assessee and pursuant to that aforesaid, the house of the petitioner and the factory of Atma Singh Steel Rolling Mills, Kanpur, located at 24/7, Factory Area, Fazalganj, Kanpur, were attached on November 16, 1972, for realisation of income-tax dues alongwith interest. ' It is also contended that Sardar Gurmukh Singh had filed Civil Miscellaneous Writ Petition No,201 of 1982, challenging the said recovery proceedings which was ultimately dismissed by this Court on August 4, 1995. ' The main submission of learned counsel for the petitioner is that the total amount sought to be recovered as income-tax dues is not more than Rs,9 lakhs and there are certain other dues against the firm and Sardar Gurmukh Singh for which the above referred to factory of the firm has also been attached. The land appurtenant to the factory is worth about Rs,1 crore, measuring about 1 acre, 'therefore, the said amount may first be recovered from the property of the firm, i,e,, the factory, which is under attachment, and if the total recovery is not satisfied then only they may switch on the recovery proceedings to the residential house in question. ' The reference of Rule 86 of the Income-tax Rules, 1962, was also given. However, in this regard the well-settled law is that the execution authority, i,e,, the Tax Recovery Officer in the instant case, derives jurisdiction to sell the property attached only to the point at which the recovery is wholly satisfied, taking aid of Order 21, Rule 64. Civil Procedure Code, 1908, which envisages power to order property attached to be sold and proceeds to be paid to person entitled, and postulates: "Any Court executing a decree may order that any property attached by it and liable to sale, or such portion thereof as may seem necessary to satisfy the decree, shall be sold, and that the proceeds of such sale, or a sufficient portion thereof, shall be paid to the party entitled under the decree to receive the same." ' Giving emphasis to the terms "sufficient portion thereof" and "necessary to satisfy the decree" if the aforesaid provision is read, it makes it crystal clear that only a sufficient portion of the attached property should be put to auction so as to satisfy the recovery and if the sale proceeds are not sufficient to satisfy the recovery, the remaining portion of the attached property may also be proceeded with. The intent of the Legislature is not that the entire property attached amounting to crores and crores should be sold for satisfying the recovery in a few lakhs. If the recovery can be satisfied by selling a particular portion of the attached property no further sale of the remaining portion of that property should be made. This being so, in our considered opinion, in the instant case, the respondents should first sell the factory which is under attachment and if the sale proceeds are not sufficient to satisfy the whole recovery, then only the residential house in question which is also under attachment can be sold. ' This proposition also finds support from the view taken by the apex Court in Ambati Narasayya v. M. Subba Rao, AIR 1990 SC 119, that it is obligatory on the Court and not discretionary that only such property or a portion thereof as is necessary to satisfy the decree, be sold, and the tendency to sell blindfold the entire property be deprecated. ' This being so and as a consequence of the aforesaid discussion, the impugned orders, dated September 9, 1996 and September 17, 1996 (Annexures 8 and 9 to the writ petition), are set aside to the extent they pertain to the sale of the residential house of the petitioner bearing corporation No,113/14, located in Swamp Nagar, Kanpur. However, the respondents shall proceed to sell the property of the firm, Atma Singh Steel Rolling Mills, Kanpur, 24/7, Factory Area, Fazalganj, Kanpur, in pursuance of the impugned orders for the realisation of income-tax dues alongwith interest. ' With these directions, this petition stands allowed. There shall be no order at to costs. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Allahabad High Court Judge(s): B. M. Lal, B. K. Sharma Title: Smt. MOHINDER KAUR vs INCOME TAX OFFICER and others Case No.: Writ Petition No,718 of 1996 Date of Judgment: 1996-10-17 Reported As: 1999 P T D 2751 Result: Petition allowed Judgment JUDGMENT ' B.M. LAL, J.---Sri Shashi Kant Gupta for the petitioner and Sri Ashok Kumar, standing counsel for the respondents. They are heard. ' This petition was heard yesterday also, i,e,, on October 16, 1996, and orders were reserved but during the lunch hour Sri Shashi Kant Gupta appeared in Chambers to request that the writ petition be reheard as certain legal grounds could not be urged during the course of arguments. This persuaded this Court to place this petition for rehearing today. ' Having heard learned counsel for respective parties, the petition is being disposed of finally with their consent. ' By this petition, the petitioner Smt. Mohinder Kaur, wife of the late Sardar Saran Singh, seeks a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the proclamation of sale, dated September 9, 1996, and an order, dated September 17, 1996, passed by respondent No,2, the Tax Recovery Officer, Kanpur (contained in Annexures 8 and 9 to the writ petition respectively), whereby auction sale of the house of the late Sardar Saran Singh, bearing corporation No,113/14, located in Swamp Nagar, Kanpur, fixed on October 17, 1996, at "Aaykar Bhawan", Civil Lines, Kanpur, is adjourned to October 23, 1996. ' In a nutshell it is contended for the petitioner that the petitioner's husband the late Sardar Saran Singh, was a partner in Atma Singh Steel Rolling Mills, Kanpur, wherein Sardar Gurukukh Singh and others are also partners. During the search and seizure conducted in the year 1972 by the income-tax authorities at the business premises of the firm and at the residence of Sardar Gurmukh Singh and the late Sardar Saran Singh, certain books of account and a number of loose papers were seized wherein it is found that the business transactions of individual dealings of Sardar Gurmukh Singh for the assessment years 1970-71, 1971-72, 1972-73 and prior transactions were of the firm, Atma Singh Steel Rolling Mills, Kanpur, and the same appears to have not been disclosed in the return filed by them. Therefore, proceedings were initiated against the late Sardar Saran Singh and the firm, Atma Singh Steel Rolling Mills, Kanpur, which ultimately culminated into recovery proceedings of huge amounts against the assessee and pursuant to that aforesaid, the house of the petitioner and the factory of Atma Singh Steel Rolling Mills, Kanpur, located at 24/7, Factory Area, Fazalganj, Kanpur, were attached on November 16, 1972, for realisation of income-tax dues alongwith interest. ' It is also contended that Sardar Gurmukh Singh had filed Civil Miscellaneous Writ Petition No,201 of 1982, challenging the said recovery proceedings which was ultimately dismissed by this Court on August 4, 1995. ' The main submission of learned counsel for the petitioner is that the total amount sought to be recovered as income-tax dues is not more than Rs,9 lakhs and there are certain other dues against the firm and Sardar Gurmukh Singh for which the above referred to factory of the firm has also been attached. The land appurtenant to the factory is worth about Rs,1 crore, measuring about 1 acre, 'therefore, the said amount may first be recovered from the property of the firm, i,e,, the factory, which is under attachment, and if the total recovery is not satisfied then only they may switch on the recovery proceedings to the residential house in question. ' The reference of Rule 86 of the Income-tax Rules, 1962, was also given. However, in this regard the well-settled law is that the execution authority, i,e,, the Tax Recovery Officer in the instant case, derives jurisdiction to sell the property attached only to the point at which the recovery is wholly satisfied, taking aid of Order 21, Rule 64. Civil Procedure Code, 1908, which envisages power to order property attached to be sold and proceeds to be paid to person entitled, and postulates: "Any Court executing a decree may order that any property attached by it and liable to sale, or such portion thereof as may seem necessary to satisfy the decree, shall be sold, and that the proceeds of such sale, or a sufficient portion thereof, shall be paid to the party entitled under the decree to receive the same." ' Giving emphasis to the terms "sufficient portion thereof" and "necessary to satisfy the decree" if the aforesaid provision is read, it makes it crystal clear that only a sufficient portion of the attached property should be put to auction so as to satisfy the recovery and if the sale proceeds are not sufficient to satisfy the recovery, the remaining portion of the attached property may also be proceeded with. The intent of the Legislature is not that the entire property attached amounting to crores and crores should be sold for satisfying the recovery in a few lakhs. If the recovery can be satisfied by selling a particular portion of the attached property no further sale of the remaining portion of that property should be made. This being so, in our considered opinion, in the instant case, the respondents should first sell the factory which is under attachment and if the sale proceeds are not sufficient to satisfy the whole recovery, then only the residential house in question which is also under attachment can be sold. ' This proposition also finds support from the view taken by the apex Court in Ambati Narasayya v. M. Subba Rao, AIR 1990 SC 119, that it is obligatory on the Court and not discretionary that only such property or a portion thereof as is necessary to satisfy the decree, be sold, and the tendency to sell blindfold the entire property be deprecated. ' This being so and as a consequence of the aforesaid discussion, the impugned orders, dated September 9, 1996 and September 17, 1996 (Annexures 8 and 9 to the writ petition), are set aside to the extent they pertain to the sale of the residential house of the petitioner bearing corporation No,113/14, located in Swamp Nagar, Kanpur. However, the respondents shall proceed to sell the property of the firm, Atma Singh Steel Rolling Mills, Kanpur, 24/7, Factory Area, Fazalganj, Kanpur, in pursuance of the impugned orders for the realisation of income-tax dues alongwith interest. ' With these directions, this petition stands allowed. There shall be no order at to costs. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem