EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark SUHRAB vs THE STATE Criminal Bail Application No.204 and M.A. No.497 of 2007 Bail Application No.204 and M.A. No.497 of 2007 M.A. No.497 of 2007 Judgment Details Cited by 2 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: SUHRAB Respondant: THE STATE Result: Bail granted Judgment Date: 2007-06-04 Court: Sindh High Court Judges: Khilji Arif Hussain Author Citations Advocates Statutes 2007 Y L R 2374 Subsequent References Judgment ORDER ' KHILJI ARIF HUSSAIN, JThis bail application has been filed by Sohrab, accused in Crime No. 19 of 2003 registered at Police Station, Khanpur for offence under sections 302, 459, ' 148 and 149, P.P.C. ' On the perusal of F.I.R. It appears that only presence of the accused has been alleged whereas no overt act has been attributed to him. In the F.I.R. Though it has been alleged that the applicant was present along with K.K on the spot but it has not been alleged that he took part or fired upon, any of the complainant party. Since no allegation has been made that the applicant has taken part in the offence or any over act has been alleged against him the case requires further enquiry. Accordingly applicant is granted bail on furnishing surety in the sum of Rs.200,000 as P.R. Bond in the like amount to the satisfaction of the trial Court. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Sindh High Court Judge(s): Khilji Arif Hussain Title: SUHRAB vs THE STATE Case No.: Criminal Bail Application No.204 and M.A. No.497 of 2007 Bail Application No.204 and M.A. No.497 of 2007 M.A. No.497 of 2007 Date of Judgment: 2007-06-04 Reported As: 2007 Y L R 2374 Result: Bail granted Judgment ORDER ' KHILJI ARIF HUSSAIN, JThis bail application has been filed by Sohrab, accused in Crime No. 19 of 2003 registered at Police Station, Khanpur for offence under sections 302, 459, ' 148 and 149, P.P.C. ' On the perusal of F.I.R. It appears that only presence of the accused has been alleged whereas no overt act has been attributed to him. In the F.I.R. Though it has been alleged that the applicant was present along with K.K on the spot but it has not been alleged that he took part or fired upon, any of the complainant party. Since no allegation has been made that the applicant has taken part in the offence or any over act has been alleged against him the case requires further enquiry. Accordingly applicant is granted bail on furnishing surety in the sum of Rs.200,000 as P.R. Bond in the like amount to the satisfaction of the trial Court. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-14 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem