EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark UMAR HAYAT vs MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN Etc Review Petition No. 1% of 1989 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 1 Appeallant: UMAR HAYAT Respondant: MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN Etc Result: N/A Judgment Date: 1994-08-07 Court: Board of Revenue, Punjab Judges: Imtiaz Masrur Citations Advocates Statutes K.L.R. 1995 Revenue Cases 11 Judgment ORDER IMTIAZ MASRUR, MEMBER.- A Review Petition had been filed against the order 4.11.1989, of Mr. Zaheer Sajjad, the Member (Judical-I), Board of Revenue, Punjab. Mr Murtaza Beg Birlas, the then Member (Judical-II), Board of Revenue, Punjab re-called the order dated 4.11.1989 vide his orders dated 6.6.1993. Hence this case will be treated as a revision petition against the order of the Additional Commissioner(Revenue) dated 14.7.1988. 2. The facts are that the petitioner being aggrieved by the sanction of mutation No. 10046, sanctioned on 23.8.1987, filed an appeal before the A. C/Collector, who dismissed it vide his order dated 28.1.1988. The petitioner filed an appeal before the Additional Commissioner (Revenue), Sargodha Division, which was also dismissed on 14.7.1988. Thereupon, the petitioner filed a revision petition before the Board of Revenue, Punjab, which was remanded to the AC/Collector, Isakhel for disposal, vide order dated 4.11.1989, The review petition was accepted by the then Member, Board of Revenue vide his order dated 6.6.1993 stating that case will be decided afresh. 3. I have, heard the learned counsels for the petitioner and the respondents. 4. The learned counsel for the petitioner stated that the petitioner's area was included in the joint Khata of the respondents. Petitioner's consent is not included in the mutation. He stated that since the learned Member, Board of / Revenue, Mr. Murtaza Beg Birlas had recalled the order of learned Member | (Judical-I), Mr. Zaheer Sajjad dated 4.11.1989, therefore, the Additional Commissioner (Revenue)'s, orders are now to .Be treated as impugned orders, j The learned counsel stated that the lower courts have deeded on technical j grounds without going into merits of the case. He prayed that the case might be I remanded to the Collector for decision on merit. 5. The learned counsel for the respondents, on the other had, stated | that both the petitioner and the respondents are real brothers. He further stated I that four mutations had been attested on the same day i.e. 23.7.1987 and thumb I impressions had been affixed on fard Patwar. The petitioner obtained copies on 19.9.1987 but filed appeal on 26.11.1987 after 3 months 5 days. It is incorrect that the petitioner had no knowledge about the transaction because he obtained the copies on 19.9.1987. He stated that out of 4 mutations only one mutation was being challenged, which that he admitted the other three mutations. 6. In his right of reply the petitioner stated that the three mutations were about the exchange of land while the fourth mutation No.10046 did not pertain to exchange and was disputed. He stated that the copies of mutation had been , obtained on 19.9.1987 which pertained to the exchange and not about 10046. 7. I have given my anxious thought to the arguments advanced on both sides and perused the record and the impugned orders. 8. As per record the presence of the parties is not disputed. All the four mutations had been deeded on the same date. The appeal before the ; Commissioner was time barred by 3 months 5 days. If the petitioner feels that his area had been fraudulently induced in the land of the respondents, his real \ brothers, he is at liberty to go to the Civil Courts. It has been rightly held in the impugned orders that the Collector had deeded the mutations keeping in view the I law and rules on the subject. 9. In view of the above the revision petition is dismissed and the impugned orders of Additional Commissioner(Revenue), Sargodha Division, are upheld. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Board of Revenue, Punjab Judge(s): Imtiaz Masrur Title: UMAR HAYAT vs MUHAMMAD NAWAZ KHAN Etc Case No.: Review Petition No. 1% of 1989 Date of Judgment: 1994-08-07 Reported As: K.L.R. 1995 Revenue Cases 11 Result: N/A Judgment ORDER IMTIAZ MASRUR, MEMBER.- A Review Petition had been filed against the order 4.11.1989, of Mr. Zaheer Sajjad, the Member (Judical-I), Board of Revenue, Punjab. Mr Murtaza Beg Birlas, the then Member (Judical-II), Board of Revenue, Punjab re-called the order dated 4.11.1989 vide his orders dated 6.6.1993. Hence this case will be treated as a revision petition against the order of the Additional Commissioner(Revenue) dated 14.7.1988. 2. The facts are that the petitioner being aggrieved by the sanction of mutation No. 10046, sanctioned on 23.8.1987, filed an appeal before the A. C/Collector, who dismissed it vide his order dated 28.1.1988. The petitioner filed an appeal before the Additional Commissioner (Revenue), Sargodha Division, which was also dismissed on 14.7.1988. Thereupon, the petitioner filed a revision petition before the Board of Revenue, Punjab, which was remanded to the AC/Collector, Isakhel for disposal, vide order dated 4.11.1989, The review petition was accepted by the then Member, Board of Revenue vide his order dated 6.6.1993 stating that case will be decided afresh. 3. I have, heard the learned counsels for the petitioner and the respondents. 4. The learned counsel for the petitioner stated that the petitioner's area was included in the joint Khata of the respondents. Petitioner's consent is not included in the mutation. He stated that since the learned Member, Board of / Revenue, Mr. Murtaza Beg Birlas had recalled the order of learned Member | (Judical-I), Mr. Zaheer Sajjad dated 4.11.1989, therefore, the Additional Commissioner (Revenue)'s, orders are now to .Be treated as impugned orders, j The learned counsel stated that the lower courts have deeded on technical j grounds without going into merits of the case. He prayed that the case might be I remanded to the Collector for decision on merit. 5. The learned counsel for the respondents, on the other had, stated | that both the petitioner and the respondents are real brothers. He further stated I that four mutations had been attested on the same day i.e. 23.7.1987 and thumb I impressions had been affixed on fard Patwar. The petitioner obtained copies on 19.9.1987 but filed appeal on 26.11.1987 after 3 months 5 days. It is incorrect that the petitioner had no knowledge about the transaction because he obtained the copies on 19.9.1987. He stated that out of 4 mutations only one mutation was being challenged, which that he admitted the other three mutations. 6. In his right of reply the petitioner stated that the three mutations were about the exchange of land while the fourth mutation No.10046 did not pertain to exchange and was disputed. He stated that the copies of mutation had been , obtained on 19.9.1987 which pertained to the exchange and not about 10046. 7. I have given my anxious thought to the arguments advanced on both sides and perused the record and the impugned orders. 8. As per record the presence of the parties is not disputed. All the four mutations had been deeded on the same date. The appeal before the ; Commissioner was time barred by 3 months 5 days. If the petitioner feels that his area had been fraudulently induced in the land of the respondents, his real \ brothers, he is at liberty to go to the Civil Courts. It has been rightly held in the impugned orders that the Collector had deeded the mutations keeping in view the I law and rules on the subject. 9. In view of the above the revision petition is dismissed and the impugned orders of Additional Commissioner(Revenue), Sargodha Division, are upheld. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem