EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark ZAHOOR AHMED AND 2 OTHERS vs MEMBER, BOARD OF REVENUE, BALUCHISTAN AND 3 OTHERS Constitutional Petition No, 29 of 1971 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 1 Coram 2 Appeallant: ZAHOOR AHMED AND 2 OTHERS Respondant: MEMBER, BOARD OF REVENUE, BALUCHISTAN AND 3 OTHERS Result: Petition allowed Judgment Date: 1976-04-22 Court: Balochistan High Court Judges: Agha Ali Haider Agha Ali Hyder Citations Advocates Statutes P L D 1976 Quetta 44 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT ' The circumstances giving rise to this Writ Petition are as follows : 2. The petitioners Nos. 1 and 2 are brothers inter se, while the petitioner No, 3 is their sister's son. The petitioners are living in various districts of the Punjab. The petitioners 1 and 2 had a brother, named Mushtaq Ahmad. The said Mushtaq Ahmad died leaving behind a daughter by the name of Mst. Perveen Akhtar, who was married to one Faiz Muhammad from Sibi in the year 1967. It appears that the course of their marriage did not run too smooth, and Mst, Perveen Akhtar filed a suit in a Court at Rawalpindi for the dissolution of marriage, which for aught we know, is still pending. It is alleged that, in order to pressurise the present petitioners, who are related to Mst. Perveen Akhtar with the closest tie, to withdraw the aforesaid suit, a false complaint had been got filed through the present respondent No, 4. Be that as it may, the allegation contained in the complaint was that the three petitioners had turned up at Sibi, and introduced themselves as businessmen, dealing in dry fruits. They beguiled the said respondent into advancing a sum of Rs, 3,000 for the purpose of collaborating in their business. Subsequently the said respondent discovered that the three petitioners were confidence tricksters and had cheated him of the money by false representation. He, therefore, filed a complaint before the Assistant Commissioner, Sibi. It appears from the judgment of the learned Commissioner and it was candidly admitted by Mr. Basharatullah, learned counsel for the said respondent too, in the course of the arguments here that the learned Assistant Commissioner after holding a preliminary enquiry, to begin with dismissed the complaint, on the ground that it disclosed a civil dispute, but presumably on the same day, he registered a case against the petitioners for offences under section 420/409/109, P. P. C. And issued bailable warrants. The petitioners, apprised of the situation, made an application for anticipatory bail before the learned Sessions Judge, Quetta, which was granted to them, and thereafter they preferred an appeal before the learned Commissioner of this Division, impugning the order of the registration of the case against them. The learned Commissioner took a serious view of the situation, inasmuch as he found that there was an order dismissing the complaint, and subsequently another order, which was diametrically opposed to the earlier order of dismissal, had been substituted on a freshly pasted paper. It is not necessary as to what else he had to say on the subject, but the order was quashed. It was the respondent No, 4, who now went in revision before the Member, Board of Revenue. The matter was heard by Capt. Saleh Muhammad Khan. He did not find any fault with the observations made by the Commissioner in regard to one order being superseded by another, but allowed the revision application only on the short ground that the present respondent No, 4 had not been given an opportunity to participate in the proceedings, and the order was passed by the Commissioner behind his back. The case was, therefore, ordered to be proceeded with before the Assistant Commissioner. 3. The main contention advanced by Mr. S. H. Jafri, learned counsel for the petitioners, was that once the Assistant Commissioner had refused to take cognisance and dismissed the complaint, he could not review his order, and admit the complaint thereafter. It is admitted on all hands, that there is no provision of review to be found in the Criminal Law (Special Provisions)A Ordinance, 1968. The power of review is a special creation of a statute and cannot be availed of, if not conferred therein. This position of law is hardly open to any dispute. However, it was contended by Mr. Basharatullah, learned counsel for the respondent No, 4, that, since cognisance had been taken by the Assistant Commissioner under section 4 of the Ordinance referred to earlier, the Courts under the Ordinary Law, including the High Court and, the Supreme Court could not interfere in the matter, as their jurisdiction stood barred under the said Ordinance. I quite agree, and there are a number of judgments, in which it has been held that the High Court and the Supreme Court have got no supervisory jurisdiction once a case had been drawn into this system of administration of justice. It still remains to see, whether cognisance was taken, and the case was registered in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance at all. The Assistant Commissioner, it is an admitted position, had dismissed the complaint. The question is, whether, in the absence of any power of review in the scheme of the Ordinance, he could B re-admit the matter and issue process Since there is no such provision, he was exercising a power which the Ordinance did not contemplate. He was, therefore, not working within the sphere allotted to him by the Ordinance, and, if a Tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction is not functioning within the substance and form of a special statute, it cannot claim immunity on the basis of an ouster clause. (See Raunag Ali v. Chief Settlement Commissioner and others (1) and Haji Ali Buz Khan and another v. The Chief Land Commissioner, West Pakistan and another (2). Once it is found, as it has been so found, that the order of the admission of the complaint was beyond jurisdiction, and therefore a nullity, any superstructure thereon will suffer from the same blemish and fall to the ground, because nothing can be propped up on such a tottering foundation. {{FOOT NOTE}} P L P 1973 S C 236 (2) 1974 S C M R 98 {{FOOT NOTE}} 4. The impugned order passed by the learned Member, Board of Revenue, under the circumstances, is not in the exercise of lawful authority. I will, therefore, quash it. The parties will, however, bear their own costs. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Balochistan High Court Judge(s): Agha Ali Haider, Agha Ali Hyder Title: ZAHOOR AHMED AND 2 OTHERS vs MEMBER, BOARD OF REVENUE, BALUCHISTAN AND 3 OTHERS Case No.: Constitutional Petition No, 29 of 1971 Date of Judgment: 1976-04-22 Reported As: P L D 1976 Quetta 44 Result: Petition allowed Judgment JUDGMENT ' The circumstances giving rise to this Writ Petition are as follows : 2. The petitioners Nos. 1 and 2 are brothers inter se, while the petitioner No, 3 is their sister's son. The petitioners are living in various districts of the Punjab. The petitioners 1 and 2 had a brother, named Mushtaq Ahmad. The said Mushtaq Ahmad died leaving behind a daughter by the name of Mst. Perveen Akhtar, who was married to one Faiz Muhammad from Sibi in the year 1967. It appears that the course of their marriage did not run too smooth, and Mst, Perveen Akhtar filed a suit in a Court at Rawalpindi for the dissolution of marriage, which for aught we know, is still pending. It is alleged that, in order to pressurise the present petitioners, who are related to Mst. Perveen Akhtar with the closest tie, to withdraw the aforesaid suit, a false complaint had been got filed through the present respondent No, 4. Be that as it may, the allegation contained in the complaint was that the three petitioners had turned up at Sibi, and introduced themselves as businessmen, dealing in dry fruits. They beguiled the said respondent into advancing a sum of Rs, 3,000 for the purpose of collaborating in their business. Subsequently the said respondent discovered that the three petitioners were confidence tricksters and had cheated him of the money by false representation. He, therefore, filed a complaint before the Assistant Commissioner, Sibi. It appears from the judgment of the learned Commissioner and it was candidly admitted by Mr. Basharatullah, learned counsel for the said respondent too, in the course of the arguments here that the learned Assistant Commissioner after holding a preliminary enquiry, to begin with dismissed the complaint, on the ground that it disclosed a civil dispute, but presumably on the same day, he registered a case against the petitioners for offences under section 420/409/109, P. P. C. And issued bailable warrants. The petitioners, apprised of the situation, made an application for anticipatory bail before the learned Sessions Judge, Quetta, which was granted to them, and thereafter they preferred an appeal before the learned Commissioner of this Division, impugning the order of the registration of the case against them. The learned Commissioner took a serious view of the situation, inasmuch as he found that there was an order dismissing the complaint, and subsequently another order, which was diametrically opposed to the earlier order of dismissal, had been substituted on a freshly pasted paper. It is not necessary as to what else he had to say on the subject, but the order was quashed. It was the respondent No, 4, who now went in revision before the Member, Board of Revenue. The matter was heard by Capt. Saleh Muhammad Khan. He did not find any fault with the observations made by the Commissioner in regard to one order being superseded by another, but allowed the revision application only on the short ground that the present respondent No, 4 had not been given an opportunity to participate in the proceedings, and the order was passed by the Commissioner behind his back. The case was, therefore, ordered to be proceeded with before the Assistant Commissioner. 3. The main contention advanced by Mr. S. H. Jafri, learned counsel for the petitioners, was that once the Assistant Commissioner had refused to take cognisance and dismissed the complaint, he could not review his order, and admit the complaint thereafter. It is admitted on all hands, that there is no provision of review to be found in the Criminal Law (Special Provisions)A Ordinance, 1968. The power of review is a special creation of a statute and cannot be availed of, if not conferred therein. This position of law is hardly open to any dispute. However, it was contended by Mr. Basharatullah, learned counsel for the respondent No, 4, that, since cognisance had been taken by the Assistant Commissioner under section 4 of the Ordinance referred to earlier, the Courts under the Ordinary Law, including the High Court and, the Supreme Court could not interfere in the matter, as their jurisdiction stood barred under the said Ordinance. I quite agree, and there are a number of judgments, in which it has been held that the High Court and the Supreme Court have got no supervisory jurisdiction once a case had been drawn into this system of administration of justice. It still remains to see, whether cognisance was taken, and the case was registered in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance at all. The Assistant Commissioner, it is an admitted position, had dismissed the complaint. The question is, whether, in the absence of any power of review in the scheme of the Ordinance, he could B re-admit the matter and issue process Since there is no such provision, he was exercising a power which the Ordinance did not contemplate. He was, therefore, not working within the sphere allotted to him by the Ordinance, and, if a Tribunal of exclusive jurisdiction is not functioning within the substance and form of a special statute, it cannot claim immunity on the basis of an ouster clause. (See Raunag Ali v. Chief Settlement Commissioner and others (1) and Haji Ali Buz Khan and another v. The Chief Land Commissioner, West Pakistan and another (2). Once it is found, as it has been so found, that the order of the admission of the complaint was beyond jurisdiction, and therefore a nullity, any superstructure thereon will suffer from the same blemish and fall to the ground, because nothing can be propped up on such a tottering foundation. {{FOOT NOTE}} P L P 1973 S C 236 (2) 1974 S C M R 98 {{FOOT NOTE}} 4. The impugned order passed by the learned Member, Board of Revenue, under the circumstances, is not in the exercise of lawful authority. I will, therefore, quash it. The parties will, however, bear their own costs. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem