EastLaw Upgrade to our premium plan for full access to all features. Click here to upgrade to premium. home Judgments judges courts statutes departments legal news AK Areesha Kaleem free Subscriptions Report Problem Logout Back Bookmark ZIA-UD-DIN ABDUL HAMID vs AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR GOVERNMENTthrough Secretary Education and 95 others Service Appeal No, 363 Judgment Details Cited by 0 Citing 0 Coram 3 Appeallant: ZIA-UD-DIN ABDUL HAMID Respondant: AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR GOVERNMENTthrough Secretary Education and 95 others Result: Appeal allowed Judgment Date: 1992-01-27 Court: Azad Jammu and Kashmir Service Tribunal Judges: Sardar Muhammad Sajawal Khan Raja Muhammad Ashraf Kayani Zaidullah Khan Citations Advocates Statutes 1992 P L C (C.S.) 876 Judgment Excerpt Judgment JUDGMENT ' SARDAR MUHAMMAD SAJAWAL KHAN (CHAIRMAN).---The instant appeal is directed against an entry in the seniority list dated 28-4-1986 issued by the Office of Deputy Director of Schools, Azad Jammu and Kashmir by which the appellant was placed at serial No, 160 below to the respondents Nos, 3 to 96. The grievance of the appellant is that he was senior to the respondents for having stepped in National Pay Scale No, 14 w,e,f, 5-6-1976. But the respondent No, 2 without considering his date of entry in regular grade of service viz. Pay scale No, 14 has placed him junior to the respondents in the aforesaid seniority list. It is further stated by the appellant that under Article 84 of K.S.R. Vol. I, the respondent No,2 was not justified to drop him from the merit list bacause of his clearing the compartment of B.Ed. Examination in the second attempt on 7-7-1977. Under the aforesaid provision of rule of law, the appellant and the respondents Nos,3 to 96 were on equal footing and had the equal merits in service of the Department even if the said respondents had passed the B.Ed. Examination earlier than him in the first attempt. In his first attempt, the appellant was, no doubt, placed in the compartment but after having cleared the compartment in the second attempt and after having been benefited by releasing his increments w,e,f, 5-6-1976, the appellant's inter se seniority with the respondents No,3 to 96 should not have been adversely affected. Being dissatisfied with the entry of his name at serial No, 160 in the aforsaid seniority list, the appellant brought an appeal against the respondents Nos, 3 to 96 before Secretary Education (respondent No,1). But his appeal was not decided by him within the stipulated time. Hence this appeal. 2. The objections taken by the respondents in the abovenoted appeal to be briefly stated are as follows:- (i) that the appeal is premature because the seniority list against which the appeal is brought is not final; (ii) that the appeal is time-barred; (iii) that the appeal is not maintainable because it is not brought against any specific order of respondent No,2. (iv) that the appellant having failed in submitting his objections to the impugned seniority list at the proper time had no locus standi to challenge the entries of that seniority list before the appellate authority nor before this forum. 3. The appeal was heard by this Tribunal and was rejected by an order dated 22-2-1989 of this Tribunal. However, on appeal before the hon'ble Supreme Court, the said order of this Tribunal was set aside and the appeal was remanded back for a fresh decision according to law. 4. We have examined the file and considered the arguments as were addressed by the learned counsel of each party in the light of relevant rules. It is contended on behalf of the respondents that Article No,84 of K.S.R. Vol. I does not envisage granting of seniority to a civil servant who is allowed increments after having passed the prescribed course or examination in the second attempt. According to the learned counsel, the Article referred to provides allowing of running pay scale to a teacher from an earlier date of examination if he has cleared the prescribed test or examination in the second attempt. But he looses his inter se seniority with the teachers passing the prescribed examination in the first attempt. Previously the K.S.R was applicable to all the civil servants of the Azad Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir but the same has been replaced by the rules made under the Civil Servants Act, 1977. However, some of the provisions of K.S.R. As were having no corresponding provisions in the subsequent rules were left intact to be applicable to the civil servants. Since the subject-matter of this appeal revolves round Article No, 84 of K.S.R. Vol. I, it seems essential that the relevant Artilce of K.S.R. Be reproduced below for reference and guidance purposes:- "84. Government officials with substantive appointments on time scale of pay who are, in the interest of the Government selected to undergo a course of training may count the time spent under training as service qualifying for increment of pay, provided they pass the examination within the prescribed limit. ' Note-- Teachers who at the end of their training are placed under compartment and who come out successful in the compartment test or tests will be considered to have passed the examination within the prescribed time. ' This is applicable to teachers of the Education only." ' A plain reading of the above Aritcle alongwith its note makes it very clear that a teacher who is sent up for training for qualifying himself to the post held by him and who is placed in compartment in the test or examination held in that behalf will be considered on the same footing as a teacher who is declared successful in the examination in the first attempt. It is very true that the above Rule of K.S.R. Itself is not the Rule of seniority in case of a dispute of seniority between the teachers appearing for the qualifying test, but it shall have to be accepted that the above rule of law places both categories of the teachers on equal footing and the teacher who clears the compartment in the second attempt is not to be put to any disadvantage merely for the reasons that he had not cleared the prescribed test in first attempt. We are of the opinion that the appellant has not incurred any disqualification or demerit because of clearing the B.Ed. Examination in the second attempt held in the year 1977. It is this reason that the appellant was given the benefits of increments in his time scale of pay alongwith the teachers who had earlier passed B.Ed. Examination in the first attempt. 5. It is next argued by the learned counsel for the respondents that under Rule 10 of Azad Jammu and Kashmir Education Department Subordinate Senior Schools Branch (Non-Gazetted) Cadre Rules, 1975, the seniority of the appellant was fixed in accordance with the order of merits assigned to him by the appointing authority (respondent No,2) and since the Director of Education after having considered the merits of the appellant and respondents No,3 to 96 has assigned the appellant position No,160 among the school teachers in his cadre, he was not entitled to challenge the entries of the impugned seniority list and under such circumstances his appeal must fail. The relevant Rule No, 10 referred to above is reproduced below for the better appreciation of that rule of law:- "10. SENIORITY. The seniority inter se of the members of the service in the various grade thereof shall be determined in accordance with the order of merit assigned by the Selection Board/Appointing Authority provided that persons selected for the service in an earlier selection shall rank senior to the persons selected in a later selection. EXPLANATION I. If a junior official in a lower grade is promoted to a higher grade temporarily in the public interest; even though continuing later permanently in the higher grade, it would not adversely affect the official promoted subsequently. EXPLANATION II. If a junior official in a lower grade is promoted to a higher grade by superseding a senior official and subsequently that official is also promoted, the official promoted, first shall rank senior to the official promoted subsequently. ' It is pertinent to note here that despite having perused a number of office files produced before this Tribunal. We have not come across with any order of merits or list relating to the contesting parties for the fixation of their seniority. Despite the best efforts of Mr. Muhammad Hanif Butt, Assistant Director of Education who has been representing the Department before us alongwith the counsel of the respondents, we were unable to find out any minutes of the proceedings of the Selection Committee stated to have been constituted for the preparation of the impugned seniority list. In the first hand, the respondents Nos,1 and 2 claimed it that the Inpugned seniority list of the teachers was not final one and the appeal brought by the appellant was meriting dismissal for being premature. But subsequently the respondents gave up this claim and submitted to this Tribunal that the position No,160 was rightly assigned to the appellant in the impugned seniority list because he had failed to pass B.Ed. Examination alongwith other teachers in his cadre sent up for B.Ed. Training. The impugned seniority list is not signed by the Director himself who was the appointing authority of the contesting parties. The list has been issued under the signature of Deputy Director without specifying it that he was duly authorised by the Director of Education respondent No,2 for circulating the seniority list under his own signatures and under such circumstances it is doubtful whether the impugned seniority list has the legal force behind it. In the instant case there was no selection of the candidates for allotting the senior position to them and the rule referred to provides fixing of seniority according to the order of merits made by the appointing authority. But the prerequisite condition is that the candidate selected for senior position must have appeared before the first Selection Board and those placed junior to them should have participated in the next selection held later on. So the provision of selection on merits is not much relevant to the case of the appellant because he did not appear before any Selection Board nor the respondents were asked to go before any such board, or committee for fixing their seniority. In our opinion the rule of seniority referred to above is not exhaustive so far the facts of the present appeal are concerned . In the instant appeal a reference to Azad Jammu and Kashmir Civil Servants (Appointment and Condition of Service) Rules, 1977 will be advisable wherein a criteria has been fixed for fixing the seniority in respect of the civil servants falling in one and the same cadre of service and scale of pay. In order to have clear perception of the case Rule 8 of the aforesaid Rules is reproduced below:- "8. The seniority inter se of persons appointed to post in the same grade in a Functional Unit shall be determined:- (1) (a) in the case of persons appointed by initial recruitment, in accordance with the order of merit assigned by the selection authority ' Provided that persons, selected for appointment to the grade in an earlier selection shall rank senior to the persons selected in a later selection; and (b) In the case of persons appointed otherwise, with reference to the dates of their continuous appointment in the grade; ' Provided that if the date of continuous appointment in the case of two or more persons appointed to the grade is the same, the older if not junior to the younger in the next below grade, shall rank senior to the younger person' ' ' Sub-rule (b) of Rule 8 of the Rules referred to above makes it clear that the seniority .Of the civil servants will be fixed from the date of their entry in the particular grade of service and if a dispute arises between two of them or more of them because of their entry in one and the same grade of pay at one and the same date, the older in age between them is to be preferred provided the older is not junior to the younger in next below grade. We consider that this rule of seniority was quite appropriate to be applied to the present case. 6. It is duly admitted by the learned counsel for the respondents that the appellant is having clean slate of his career of service and his assessment of demerit is not available on the file excepting that he had the misfortune of not clearing B.Ed. Examination in his first attempt. As discussed above, the appellant does not lose his seniority as against the respondents merely for the reasons that while making the first attempt for passing the B.Ed. Examination he was placed in compartment and he had to clear the same in the next attempt. 7. In view of the above discussion of service rules and record placed before this Tribunal we allow this appeal and set aside the impugned entry of seniority in respect of the appellant shown in the seniority list dated 28-4-1986 and order that his inter se seniority among the teachers placed in his cadre and grade shall be reckoned from 5-6-1976, the date with effect from which he was placed in regular pay scale No, 14. No order as to the costs. ' PER RAJA MUHAMMAD ASHRAF KAYANI (MEMBER).---I have had the advantage of perusing the judgment proposed to be delivered by the learned Chairman. In my humble opinion the appeal is not maintainable for the reasons 'that the appellant who joined the Education Department on 12-12-1972 as Senior Teacher after his graduation in Arts was deputed for B.Ed. Course for the year 1974-75. He was placed under compartment vide result dated 5-6-1976 and was declared successful in the next attempt on 7-7-1977. The appellant being trained graduate was promoted in Grade B-14 on 23-7-1977 w,e,f, 5-6-1976 and later on selection Grade B-16 was sanctioned in his favour alongwith others vide order Education/Schools/10417-10656/83, dated 21-7-1983 w,e,f, 1-7-1982. Respondents Nos,3 to 30, 31 to 77, 78 to 87 and 88 to 96 were also placed in the same selection Grade B-16 by the Education Department/Schools vide Nos,322-72/81, dated 23-8-1981, 77377797/82, dated 21-6-1982, 10673-89/83, dated 21-7-1983 and 1041710656/83, dated 21-7-1983 respectively w,e,f, the 'dates given against their names. ' The impugned seniority list pertaining to the trained graduates Senior Teachers (Selection Grade) was circulated on 28-4-1986. Feeling aggrieved by the impugned portion of the seniority list viz. Serial No,60 to 160, the appellant invoked the jurisdiction of this Tribunal under Section 4 of Service Tribunal Act, 1975. ' The orders mentioned above, whereby the parties were placed or promoted in the selection Grade B-16 remained unchallenged by the appellant and were never set aside by any authority. The orders resultantly attained finality much before the circulation of the impugned seniority list which in fact was the outcome of the said orders. ' The appeal is even incompetent from another angle in view of the amended proviso (b) of subsection (1) of section 4 of Service Tribunal Act, 1975. The impugned portion of seniority list is nothing short of a formality based on the abovementioned orders which have been passed by the competent authority on the recommendations of Selection Committee. ' MIRZA ZADULLAH KHAN (ADDITIONAL MEMBER).---Due to the divergence of opinion the learned Chairman and brother Member of the Tribunal I was appointed as Additional Member of the Tribunal so that the issue of seniority of the appellant may be resolved. 2. I have perused the record and heard the learned counsel for the parties. Syed Nazir Hussain Kazami the learned counsel for the appellant has contended that the seniority list prepared by the Department is not correct and is unjust and against facts. According to him the appellant was sent to undergo training of B.Ed. In Afzalpur College and in the first attempt he could not qualify. He was placed under a compartment on 5-6-1976 and on 7-7-1977 he cleared B.Ed. As a result of which he was awarded Grade B-14 from 5-6-1976 under Article 84 of KSR. According to him this Article provides that if the trainee qualifies the training in compartment then he will be allowed increment in pay from the date of announcement of compartment. According to him the seniority is also to be given to the appellant from the date when the result was announced first and he was placed under compartment. Article 84 of KSR says that the Members of Education Department shall be entitled to pay increment from the date of first announcement of the result and not from the date they clear the compartment. Therefore, according to him under Article 84 of KSR the pay and seniority 'in case of parties shall run from the same date', 5-6-1976 and not from 7-7-1977. Appellant is senior to others but he has been wrongly declared junior. 3. On the other hand Kh. Abdus Samad the learned counsel for the respondents Government has taken the stand that the appellant cannot claim seniority from 5-6-1976, the date when he was placed under compartment. According to him the appellant qualified B.Ed. Examination on 7-7-1977, therefore, from this date his seniority shall be determined. 4. Thus according to the counsel for the parties the thing that is to be determined is as to whether the seniority of the appellant shall be counted from 5-6-1976 (the date when he was placed under compartment) or 7-7-1977 (when the appellant was declared successful in B.Ed.). 5. Article 84 of KSR provides that when the Government officials undergo a course of training in the interest of Government the time spent under training shall be counted as service qualifying for increment of pay provided they pass the examination within the prescribed time. In the note of the Article it is also provided that if a teacher is placed under compartment at the end of training and ultimately he succeeds in the test he shall be considered to have passed the examination within the prescribed time. 6. Keeping in view this Article, we can come to the conclusion that after clearing the test of compartment the teachers of the Education Department shall be considered to have passed B.Ed. Examination within prescribed time that is the reason why appellant was granted Grade B-14 w,e,f, 5-6-1976. Had this not been so the granting of grade should have been from the date he passed the test i,e, 7-7-1977. 7. The written statement filed on behalf of Government and the record presented in the Tribunal are contradicting each other. In the written statement at page No,84 of the file and page No,4 of the statement it is written that the appellant was given Pay Scale 350-750 from 7-7-1977, the date of qualifying his B.Ed. Examination vide order dated 23-7-1977. But the record shows that this scale was awarded to the appellant on 5-6-1976, the date when he was placed under compartment. When the grade of pay was awarded on 5-6-1976 then natural justice demands that his seniority should also be counted from that date. I have not come across with any provision of rule of procedure by which the seniority of the person is counted from a date which is not a date of awarding of the pay scale. The averment in the written statement is not corroborated by the record of the case. 8. If under KSR the pay scale, can be given from the back date why not the seniority; the rule itself implies that in case of qualifying B.Ed. Even after compartment the pay and seniority both shall be given. Had the appellant not qualified the examination the position would have been quite different. But in the case in hand the position is clear and we cannot snatch a right arbitrarily on the ground that the man could pass the examination after having been placed under compartments. 9. With these observations I agree with the findings of the learned Chairman that the date which shall matter for the determination of seniority is 5-6-1976 and not 7-7-1977. ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL ' As per judgment of Mr. Zad Ullah Mirza, learned Member of the Tribunal, the majority view held is that the appellant is entitled tq get his seniority fixed w,e,f, 5-6-1976, the date from which the annual increment in the time scale of pay was released in his favour by the Education Department. Hence the appeal is allowed. No order as to cost. The Registrar of the Tribunal shall inform the result of the appeal to the parties and their counsel. www.eastlaw.pk Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Court Name: Azad Jammu and Kashmir Service Tribunal Judge(s): Sardar Muhammad Sajawal Khan, Raja Muhammad Ashraf Kayani, Zaidullah Khan Title: ZIA-UD-DIN ABDUL HAMID vs AZAD JAMMU AND KASHMIR GOVERNMENTthrough Secretary Education and 95 others Case No.: Service Appeal No, 363 Date of Judgment: 1992-01-27 Reported As: 1992 P L C (C.S.) 876 Result: Appeal allowed Judgment JUDGMENT ' SARDAR MUHAMMAD SAJAWAL KHAN (CHAIRMAN).---The instant appeal is directed against an entry in the seniority list dated 28-4-1986 issued by the Office of Deputy Director of Schools, Azad Jammu and Kashmir by which the appellant was placed at serial No, 160 below to the respondents Nos, 3 to 96. The grievance of the appellant is that he was senior to the respondents for having stepped in National Pay Scale No, 14 w,e,f, 5-6-1976. But the respondent No, 2 without considering his date of entry in regular grade of service viz. Pay scale No, 14 has placed him junior to the respondents in the aforesaid seniority list. It is further stated by the appellant that under Article 84 of K.S.R. Vol. I, the respondent No,2 was not justified to drop him from the merit list bacause of his clearing the compartment of B.Ed. Examination in the second attempt on 7-7-1977. Under the aforesaid provision of rule of law, the appellant and the respondents Nos,3 to 96 were on equal footing and had the equal merits in service of the Department even if the said respondents had passed the B.Ed. Examination earlier than him in the first attempt. In his first attempt, the appellant was, no doubt, placed in the compartment but after having cleared the compartment in the second attempt and after having been benefited by releasing his increments w,e,f, 5-6-1976, the appellant's inter se seniority with the respondents No,3 to 96 should not have been adversely affected. Being dissatisfied with the entry of his name at serial No, 160 in the aforsaid seniority list, the appellant brought an appeal against the respondents Nos, 3 to 96 before Secretary Education (respondent No,1). But his appeal was not decided by him within the stipulated time. Hence this appeal. 2. The objections taken by the respondents in the abovenoted appeal to be briefly stated are as follows:- (i) that the appeal is premature because the seniority list against which the appeal is brought is not final; (ii) that the appeal is time-barred; (iii) that the appeal is not maintainable because it is not brought against any specific order of respondent No,2. (iv) that the appellant having failed in submitting his objections to the impugned seniority list at the proper time had no locus standi to challenge the entries of that seniority list before the appellate authority nor before this forum. 3. The appeal was heard by this Tribunal and was rejected by an order dated 22-2-1989 of this Tribunal. However, on appeal before the hon'ble Supreme Court, the said order of this Tribunal was set aside and the appeal was remanded back for a fresh decision according to law. 4. We have examined the file and considered the arguments as were addressed by the learned counsel of each party in the light of relevant rules. It is contended on behalf of the respondents that Article No,84 of K.S.R. Vol. I does not envisage granting of seniority to a civil servant who is allowed increments after having passed the prescribed course or examination in the second attempt. According to the learned counsel, the Article referred to provides allowing of running pay scale to a teacher from an earlier date of examination if he has cleared the prescribed test or examination in the second attempt. But he looses his inter se seniority with the teachers passing the prescribed examination in the first attempt. Previously the K.S.R was applicable to all the civil servants of the Azad Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir but the same has been replaced by the rules made under the Civil Servants Act, 1977. However, some of the provisions of K.S.R. As were having no corresponding provisions in the subsequent rules were left intact to be applicable to the civil servants. Since the subject-matter of this appeal revolves round Article No, 84 of K.S.R. Vol. I, it seems essential that the relevant Artilce of K.S.R. Be reproduced below for reference and guidance purposes:- "84. Government officials with substantive appointments on time scale of pay who are, in the interest of the Government selected to undergo a course of training may count the time spent under training as service qualifying for increment of pay, provided they pass the examination within the prescribed limit. ' Note-- Teachers who at the end of their training are placed under compartment and who come out successful in the compartment test or tests will be considered to have passed the examination within the prescribed time. ' This is applicable to teachers of the Education only." ' A plain reading of the above Aritcle alongwith its note makes it very clear that a teacher who is sent up for training for qualifying himself to the post held by him and who is placed in compartment in the test or examination held in that behalf will be considered on the same footing as a teacher who is declared successful in the examination in the first attempt. It is very true that the above Rule of K.S.R. Itself is not the Rule of seniority in case of a dispute of seniority between the teachers appearing for the qualifying test, but it shall have to be accepted that the above rule of law places both categories of the teachers on equal footing and the teacher who clears the compartment in the second attempt is not to be put to any disadvantage merely for the reasons that he had not cleared the prescribed test in first attempt. We are of the opinion that the appellant has not incurred any disqualification or demerit because of clearing the B.Ed. Examination in the second attempt held in the year 1977. It is this reason that the appellant was given the benefits of increments in his time scale of pay alongwith the teachers who had earlier passed B.Ed. Examination in the first attempt. 5. It is next argued by the learned counsel for the respondents that under Rule 10 of Azad Jammu and Kashmir Education Department Subordinate Senior Schools Branch (Non-Gazetted) Cadre Rules, 1975, the seniority of the appellant was fixed in accordance with the order of merits assigned to him by the appointing authority (respondent No,2) and since the Director of Education after having considered the merits of the appellant and respondents No,3 to 96 has assigned the appellant position No,160 among the school teachers in his cadre, he was not entitled to challenge the entries of the impugned seniority list and under such circumstances his appeal must fail. The relevant Rule No, 10 referred to above is reproduced below for the better appreciation of that rule of law:- "10. SENIORITY. The seniority inter se of the members of the service in the various grade thereof shall be determined in accordance with the order of merit assigned by the Selection Board/Appointing Authority provided that persons selected for the service in an earlier selection shall rank senior to the persons selected in a later selection. EXPLANATION I. If a junior official in a lower grade is promoted to a higher grade temporarily in the public interest; even though continuing later permanently in the higher grade, it would not adversely affect the official promoted subsequently. EXPLANATION II. If a junior official in a lower grade is promoted to a higher grade by superseding a senior official and subsequently that official is also promoted, the official promoted, first shall rank senior to the official promoted subsequently. ' It is pertinent to note here that despite having perused a number of office files produced before this Tribunal. We have not come across with any order of merits or list relating to the contesting parties for the fixation of their seniority. Despite the best efforts of Mr. Muhammad Hanif Butt, Assistant Director of Education who has been representing the Department before us alongwith the counsel of the respondents, we were unable to find out any minutes of the proceedings of the Selection Committee stated to have been constituted for the preparation of the impugned seniority list. In the first hand, the respondents Nos,1 and 2 claimed it that the Inpugned seniority list of the teachers was not final one and the appeal brought by the appellant was meriting dismissal for being premature. But subsequently the respondents gave up this claim and submitted to this Tribunal that the position No,160 was rightly assigned to the appellant in the impugned seniority list because he had failed to pass B.Ed. Examination alongwith other teachers in his cadre sent up for B.Ed. Training. The impugned seniority list is not signed by the Director himself who was the appointing authority of the contesting parties. The list has been issued under the signature of Deputy Director without specifying it that he was duly authorised by the Director of Education respondent No,2 for circulating the seniority list under his own signatures and under such circumstances it is doubtful whether the impugned seniority list has the legal force behind it. In the instant case there was no selection of the candidates for allotting the senior position to them and the rule referred to provides fixing of seniority according to the order of merits made by the appointing authority. But the prerequisite condition is that the candidate selected for senior position must have appeared before the first Selection Board and those placed junior to them should have participated in the next selection held later on. So the provision of selection on merits is not much relevant to the case of the appellant because he did not appear before any Selection Board nor the respondents were asked to go before any such board, or committee for fixing their seniority. In our opinion the rule of seniority referred to above is not exhaustive so far the facts of the present appeal are concerned . In the instant appeal a reference to Azad Jammu and Kashmir Civil Servants (Appointment and Condition of Service) Rules, 1977 will be advisable wherein a criteria has been fixed for fixing the seniority in respect of the civil servants falling in one and the same cadre of service and scale of pay. In order to have clear perception of the case Rule 8 of the aforesaid Rules is reproduced below:- "8. The seniority inter se of persons appointed to post in the same grade in a Functional Unit shall be determined:- (1) (a) in the case of persons appointed by initial recruitment, in accordance with the order of merit assigned by the selection authority ' Provided that persons, selected for appointment to the grade in an earlier selection shall rank senior to the persons selected in a later selection; and (b) In the case of persons appointed otherwise, with reference to the dates of their continuous appointment in the grade; ' Provided that if the date of continuous appointment in the case of two or more persons appointed to the grade is the same, the older if not junior to the younger in the next below grade, shall rank senior to the younger person' ' ' Sub-rule (b) of Rule 8 of the Rules referred to above makes it clear that the seniority .Of the civil servants will be fixed from the date of their entry in the particular grade of service and if a dispute arises between two of them or more of them because of their entry in one and the same grade of pay at one and the same date, the older in age between them is to be preferred provided the older is not junior to the younger in next below grade. We consider that this rule of seniority was quite appropriate to be applied to the present case. 6. It is duly admitted by the learned counsel for the respondents that the appellant is having clean slate of his career of service and his assessment of demerit is not available on the file excepting that he had the misfortune of not clearing B.Ed. Examination in his first attempt. As discussed above, the appellant does not lose his seniority as against the respondents merely for the reasons that while making the first attempt for passing the B.Ed. Examination he was placed in compartment and he had to clear the same in the next attempt. 7. In view of the above discussion of service rules and record placed before this Tribunal we allow this appeal and set aside the impugned entry of seniority in respect of the appellant shown in the seniority list dated 28-4-1986 and order that his inter se seniority among the teachers placed in his cadre and grade shall be reckoned from 5-6-1976, the date with effect from which he was placed in regular pay scale No, 14. No order as to the costs. ' PER RAJA MUHAMMAD ASHRAF KAYANI (MEMBER).---I have had the advantage of perusing the judgment proposed to be delivered by the learned Chairman. In my humble opinion the appeal is not maintainable for the reasons 'that the appellant who joined the Education Department on 12-12-1972 as Senior Teacher after his graduation in Arts was deputed for B.Ed. Course for the year 1974-75. He was placed under compartment vide result dated 5-6-1976 and was declared successful in the next attempt on 7-7-1977. The appellant being trained graduate was promoted in Grade B-14 on 23-7-1977 w,e,f, 5-6-1976 and later on selection Grade B-16 was sanctioned in his favour alongwith others vide order Education/Schools/10417-10656/83, dated 21-7-1983 w,e,f, 1-7-1982. Respondents Nos,3 to 30, 31 to 77, 78 to 87 and 88 to 96 were also placed in the same selection Grade B-16 by the Education Department/Schools vide Nos,322-72/81, dated 23-8-1981, 77377797/82, dated 21-6-1982, 10673-89/83, dated 21-7-1983 and 1041710656/83, dated 21-7-1983 respectively w,e,f, the 'dates given against their names. ' The impugned seniority list pertaining to the trained graduates Senior Teachers (Selection Grade) was circulated on 28-4-1986. Feeling aggrieved by the impugned portion of the seniority list viz. Serial No,60 to 160, the appellant invoked the jurisdiction of this Tribunal under Section 4 of Service Tribunal Act, 1975. ' The orders mentioned above, whereby the parties were placed or promoted in the selection Grade B-16 remained unchallenged by the appellant and were never set aside by any authority. The orders resultantly attained finality much before the circulation of the impugned seniority list which in fact was the outcome of the said orders. ' The appeal is even incompetent from another angle in view of the amended proviso (b) of subsection (1) of section 4 of Service Tribunal Act, 1975. The impugned portion of seniority list is nothing short of a formality based on the abovementioned orders which have been passed by the competent authority on the recommendations of Selection Committee. ' MIRZA ZADULLAH KHAN (ADDITIONAL MEMBER).---Due to the divergence of opinion the learned Chairman and brother Member of the Tribunal I was appointed as Additional Member of the Tribunal so that the issue of seniority of the appellant may be resolved. 2. I have perused the record and heard the learned counsel for the parties. Syed Nazir Hussain Kazami the learned counsel for the appellant has contended that the seniority list prepared by the Department is not correct and is unjust and against facts. According to him the appellant was sent to undergo training of B.Ed. In Afzalpur College and in the first attempt he could not qualify. He was placed under a compartment on 5-6-1976 and on 7-7-1977 he cleared B.Ed. As a result of which he was awarded Grade B-14 from 5-6-1976 under Article 84 of KSR. According to him this Article provides that if the trainee qualifies the training in compartment then he will be allowed increment in pay from the date of announcement of compartment. According to him the seniority is also to be given to the appellant from the date when the result was announced first and he was placed under compartment. Article 84 of KSR says that the Members of Education Department shall be entitled to pay increment from the date of first announcement of the result and not from the date they clear the compartment. Therefore, according to him under Article 84 of KSR the pay and seniority 'in case of parties shall run from the same date', 5-6-1976 and not from 7-7-1977. Appellant is senior to others but he has been wrongly declared junior. 3. On the other hand Kh. Abdus Samad the learned counsel for the respondents Government has taken the stand that the appellant cannot claim seniority from 5-6-1976, the date when he was placed under compartment. According to him the appellant qualified B.Ed. Examination on 7-7-1977, therefore, from this date his seniority shall be determined. 4. Thus according to the counsel for the parties the thing that is to be determined is as to whether the seniority of the appellant shall be counted from 5-6-1976 (the date when he was placed under compartment) or 7-7-1977 (when the appellant was declared successful in B.Ed.). 5. Article 84 of KSR provides that when the Government officials undergo a course of training in the interest of Government the time spent under training shall be counted as service qualifying for increment of pay provided they pass the examination within the prescribed time. In the note of the Article it is also provided that if a teacher is placed under compartment at the end of training and ultimately he succeeds in the test he shall be considered to have passed the examination within the prescribed time. 6. Keeping in view this Article, we can come to the conclusion that after clearing the test of compartment the teachers of the Education Department shall be considered to have passed B.Ed. Examination within prescribed time that is the reason why appellant was granted Grade B-14 w,e,f, 5-6-1976. Had this not been so the granting of grade should have been from the date he passed the test i,e, 7-7-1977. 7. The written statement filed on behalf of Government and the record presented in the Tribunal are contradicting each other. In the written statement at page No,84 of the file and page No,4 of the statement it is written that the appellant was given Pay Scale 350-750 from 7-7-1977, the date of qualifying his B.Ed. Examination vide order dated 23-7-1977. But the record shows that this scale was awarded to the appellant on 5-6-1976, the date when he was placed under compartment. When the grade of pay was awarded on 5-6-1976 then natural justice demands that his seniority should also be counted from that date. I have not come across with any provision of rule of procedure by which the seniority of the person is counted from a date which is not a date of awarding of the pay scale. The averment in the written statement is not corroborated by the record of the case. 8. If under KSR the pay scale, can be given from the back date why not the seniority; the rule itself implies that in case of qualifying B.Ed. Even after compartment the pay and seniority both shall be given. Had the appellant not qualified the examination the position would have been quite different. But in the case in hand the position is clear and we cannot snatch a right arbitrarily on the ground that the man could pass the examination after having been placed under compartments. 9. With these observations I agree with the findings of the learned Chairman that the date which shall matter for the determination of seniority is 5-6-1976 and not 7-7-1977. ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL ' As per judgment of Mr. Zad Ullah Mirza, learned Member of the Tribunal, the majority view held is that the appellant is entitled tq get his seniority fixed w,e,f, 5-6-1976, the date from which the annual increment in the time scale of pay was released in his favour by the Education Department. Hence the appeal is allowed. No order as to cost. The Registrar of the Tribunal shall inform the result of the appeal to the parties and their counsel. Disclaimer: While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and currency, we do not guarantee completeness, correctness, or applicability to specific cases of court judgments available on this website. The court judgment may be subject to updates, modifications, or revisions by the competent authorities. Therefore, it is advisable to consult the official sources or legal professionals for the most up-to-date and accurate information. The court judgments available on this website are not official publications of the Government of Pakistan. It may not reflect the most recent or authoritative version of the judgment. For official and legally binding versions, please refer to the official sources/authorized publications/certified copies of court orders. The use of the documents available on this website is at your own risk. We shall not be held liable for any loss, damage, or inconvenience arising from the use or reliance on the information contained in the data. We disclaim any responsibility for errors, omissions, or inaccuracies in the court judgment or any consequences resulting from its use. Printed On: 2025-07-15 Printed By: Areesha Kaleem